par la ré côté and konrad introduction heat transfer and frost action analyses in pavements require the knowledge of the thermal properties of each layer of the pavement structure including subgrade soils..
among the various thermal properties thermal conductivity is one of the most important input parameters in heat transfer modelling..
it is well known that the thermal conductivity of received march..
published on the nrc research press web site at université laval sainte foy qc canada..
industrial chair on the operation of infrastructures submitted to frost action..
soil is strongly influenced by its density and water content because of contrasting values of its basic components..
for instance the thermal conductivity of solid particles generally varies from to and those for water ice and air are and respectively..
moreover several other factors such as grain mineralogy and fabric also need to be considered..
in the last number of decades many studies were conducted to quantify the effects of these factors on the thermal conductivity of soils..
theoretical models were developed for the calculation of the thermal conductivity of dry soils smith and moist soils mickley de vries..
empirical models were also proposed to fit experimental data for unfrozen and frozen moist soils..
these models provide estimates of the thermal conductivity of soils using basic geotechnical index properties that can be can..
vol readily obtained compared to direct measurements of thermal conductivity..
as pointed out by côté and konrad mass transfer characteristics of pavement base course materials were not systematically studied in the past..
unfortunately the same applies to heat transfer characteristics of these base course materials..
this has resulted in lack of experimental data to evaluate the reliability of existing thermal conductivity models and if needed to establish reliable empirical models for the prediction of thermal conductivity..
the grain size distribution of pavement base course materials typically ranges from to mm inclusively..
this broad grading generally leads to high dry densities ranging from up to..
the fabric of soils which refers to the size and arrangement of particles and the pore space distribution mitchell has an undisputable influence on the thermal conductivity of soils kersten van rooyen and winterkorn johansen farouki mitchell..
it is thus expected that prediction of the thermal conductivity of compacted base course materials should be different from that of the well documented sands and finegrained soils..
the objectives of this paper are to characterize the thermal conductivity of pavement base course materials and to develop an adequate and reliable empirical model adapted to these materials..
the paper presents the experimental setup for the measurement of thermal conductivity using pyrex heat flux meters and the experimental results for unfrozen and frozen base course materials..
these observations are compared with predicted values obtained from current empirical models developed by kersten and johansen generally used by pavement engineers to show their limitations for dense well compacted pavement materials..
new empirical model using the normalized thermal conductivity concept is subsequently proposed for the prediction of thermal conductivity of base course materials..
the new model is tested with set of data from kersten for crushed rocks similar to the materials used in this study..
lastly the paper describes step by step methodology for the assessment of thermal conductivity of base course materials..
experimental program experimental setup shows the experimental setup used in this study..
it comprises thermal conductivity cell surrounded by an insulated and temperature controlled box inside large cold room maintained at constant temperature of about below the average temperature used in the test cell..
basecourse materials are compacted into cylindrical pvc mold with an inside diameter and height of and mm respectively..
the sample and the mold are placed between two pyrex disks mm in diameter and mm high..
each pyrex disk is instrumented with two thermistors embedded in the centre at few tenths of millimetre from the planar faces..
the temperature boundary conditions at the top and bottom of this three layer system are maintained constant with two independent heat exchangers to create constant vertical heat flow through both the sample and the pyrex disks..
the sample and the pyrex disks are tightly surrounded with mm thick polystyrene jacket to reduce ra..
the ambient temperature of the insulated box is maintained equal to the mean value of the temperatures applied at both extremities of the system..
the heat flux in the thermal conductivity cell is measured through the pyrex disks corning pyrex as the thermal conductivity of this standardized borosilicate glass is known and as the temperature is measured at each end of both pyrex disks..
the thermal conductivity of the pyrex varies little with the thermal conductivity is at and at and it can be assessed from the relationship given by..
as the thermal conductivity of the materials in this study is expected to range from to the thermal conductivity contrast nrc canadacôté and konrad..
grain size distribution of base and subbase materials..
between the samples and the pyrex heat flux meters remains much lower than that with conventional copper heat flux meters having thermal conductivities close to..
the temperatures of the top and bottom of each pyrex heat flux meter are recorded every min through an acquisition system and plotted as function of time..
when temperatures become constant with time steady state heat flow is reached..
the thermal gradients in the pyrex disks are readily determined when the distance between the centre of each thermistor for both disks and the temperature measurements are known..
the thermal gradient in the sample is determined from the pyrex sample interface temperatures which are extrapolated from the thermistor measurements in both pyrex disks..
the thermal conductivity in of the tested sample is approximated as..
uf where is the heat flux is the distance between two temperature measurements is the temperature difference and the subscripts uf and lf refer to the upper and lower heat flux meters respectively..
the tests were carried out at mean temperature of about for the unfrozen samples and about for the frozen samples..
the temperature difference between the top of the upper pyrex disk and the bottom of the lower pyrex disk is generally equal to for both testing temperatures..
temperature gradients of cm were obtained across the soil samples..
king asserts that the thermal conductivities of saturated crushed rocks are between and lower than the true values when measured with thermal gradients from to cm..
the effect of the thermal gradient is thus neglected in this study..
it is noted that the relative error on the thermal conductivity measurements due to the precision of the thermistors and the position of each pyrex disks mm is less than..
another factor that can influence the thermal conductivity measurements is the thermal resistance that may occur at the contact between the heat flux meters and the sample..
this effect has been discussed by birch and clark and studied more systematically by king in which the reported contact resistance expressed as an equivalent thickness of materials was about mm for limestone and mm for sandstone for sample thicknesses varying from to mm..
considering that the height of samples tested in the present study is mm contact resistances expressed as an equivalent thickness of mm for the materials with the lower conductivities and mm for those with higher conductivities will lead to an overestimation of the thermal conductivity of less than and less than respectively..
the contact resistance was thus neglected in this study..
the thermal conductivity measurement system has also been tested with reference material which consisted of two stacked pyrex disks similar to those used as heat flux meters..
the measured thermal conductivities agreed with theoretical values within less than of deviation which was considered sufficiently accurate for the purpose of this study and which also confirms that the contact resistance can indeed be neglected..
materials tested the main focus of this study was to establish reliable thermal conductivity data of unfrozen and frozen base course materials that are used in pavements as base and subbase courses..
these materials are referred to as mg and respectively in the specifications of the ministry of transportation of quebec mtq..
the grain size distribution of mg is shown in by the solid lines and that of mg is represented by the broken lines..
the materials studied herein had maximum grain size of mm..
the materials were selected from eight different quarries along the axis of the st lawrence river to include variety of samples with different geological origins to characterize the influence of mineralogy on thermal conductivity..
the materials studied were all crushed gabbro from stjoseph de beauce which is located about km south of québec ii dolostone from st eustache about km northwest of montré iii granite from québec city iv granite from québec city lac st valcartier charles limestone from st marc des carrières about km west of québec vi quartzite from vii sandstone from st anaclet km east of and viii syenite from mont st hilaire about km east of montréal..
the mineralogy of the samples was not systematically determined in the laboratory but typical compositions are given in the following according to general data from dietrich and skinner and blatt and tracy and data available from some of the quarries studied..
it is noted that the descriptive mineralogical composition of the limestone was determined by côté for the purpose of the study of hydraulic characteristics of base course materials..
gabbros are volcanic rocks generally composed of calcic in plagioclase labradorite and calcic pyroxene augite..
typical mineral composition for the materials tested..
typical mineralogical composition material major phase dolostone gabbro granite limestone quartzite sandstone syenite dolomite plagioclase labradorite pyroxene augite olivine quartz feldspar plagioclase many secondary minerals calcite quartz grains in quartz cement quartz feldspar plagioclase minor phase calcite olivine quartz dolomite trace aragonite siderite feldspar plagioclase nepheline pyroxene amphibole these rocks olivine is sometimes an important constituent and quartz may be present as minor constituent..
the mineralogical composition of the gabbro in this study was as labradorite plagioclase calcite quartz and chlorite..
limestones are sedimentary rocks mainly made of calcite calcium carbonate whereas dolostones also sedimentary rocks are made of dolomite magnesium calcium carbonate calcite is also sometimes present in dolostones..
granites are plutonic rocks principally made of quartz feldspar and plagioclase with minor mafic minerals such as biotite and hornblende..
the granites found in the québec city area generally have less than quartz..
sandstones are detrital sedimentary rocks and are mainly composed of grains of quartz with feldspar and plagioclase..
the sandstone studied here has relatively large proportion of albite which is plagioclase mineral..
the quartzite is variety of sandstone that is made of quartz grains well cemented in neogenic quartz films..
the mineralogical composition of the rimouski quartzite is as quartz plagioclase calcite and mica..
lastly the type of syenite plutonic rock studied here was nepheline syenite which is made of feldspar plagioclase nepheline and minor mafic minerals such as pyroxene and amphibole..
the very low quartz content distinguishes syenite from granite..
these typical mineralogical compositions are summarized in..
the dolostone granite quartzite sandstone and syenite samples were tested using their original grain size distributions and compacted using the kg proctor hammer and water content of for granite and for the other samples..
gabbro limestone and mostly granite samples were compacted with varying compacting energies proctor hammer vibrating hammer different grain size distributions and water contents varying from to to characterize the thermal conductivity as function of dry density..
after compaction the samples were placed in the thermal conductivity measurement system and temperature of about was applied to the bottom of the lower pyrex disk and temperature of about to the top of the upper disk resulting in mean temperature of about in the sample..
the freezing of the samples took about depending on water content and thermal steady state was usually reached after of testing..
the temperature distribution used to compute the thermal conductivity was taken after about the temperatures were then increased to about at the top of the upper disk and about at the bottom of the lower disk giving mean temperature of about in the sample..
the melting of the samples took about depending on water content..
temperatures at thermal steady state were used to compute the thermal conductivity of the unfrozen samples..
the testing time for the measurement of thermal conductivities for sample at single water content in both the unfrozen and frozen states was about after this period the sample was partially dried to obtain lower water contents and the thermal conductivity measurements in both the frozen and unfrozen states were undertaken using the same procedure..
this was repeated until the sample was almost completely dry..
the experimental procedure yielded the relationship between thermal conductivity and degree of saturation at constant dry density for unfrozen and frozen materials..
the thermal conductivity of solid particles was also measured using cylindrical rock samples drilled out of blocks taken from the quarries..
the surfaces at both ends of the cylinders were squared and polished and thin film of silicon grease was applied to minimize any thermal resistance at the rock pyrex interface..
the characteristics of each material tested herein are given in..
experimental results typical results for unfrozen frozen base course and solid rock samples typical experimental data are shown in for one granite sample with porosity of and water content of tested in frozen and an unfrozen state..
the sample was subjected to closed system freezing both ends freeze simultaneously without access to water..
the temperature at the top of the pyrex disk was maintained constant at while the bottom of the lower pyrex disk was at..
the left hand part of shows the evolution of temperature with time for the thermistors embedded in the pyrex disks..
as the moist sample begins to freeze the temperature threshold observed between and is caused by the release of the latent heat of fusion of pore water during phase change..
the sample was completely frozen after about and thermal steady state was reached after of testing..
the temperature profile at is shown in the lefthand part of the temperature gradients were in the upper pyrex disk in the sample and in the lower disk..
the thermal conductivity in each pyrex disk is for the upper disk mean temperature of and for the lower disk mean temperature of according to powell et nrc canadacôté and konrad..
mass volume properties of the materials tested and details of the testing program..
material location dolostone gabbro st eusatche st joseph de bauce granite valcartier granite limestone lac st charles st marc des carrières quartzite rimouski sandstone st anaclet syenite mont st hilaire..
of testsa range of unfrozen frozen rock cylinders..
these values used in eq..
give thermal conductivity of for the frozen sample as kf..
after of testing in the frozen state the temperatures at the top and bottom of the pyrex disks were then changed to about and respectively as shown in the temperature threshold between and of elapsed testing was caused by the energy absorbed by the sample as pore ice melts..
shows the steady state temperature profile measured at for the unfrozen sample..
the temperature gradients were equal to in the upper disk in the unfrozen sample and in the lower disk..
the thermal conductivity was mean temperature of in the upper pyrex disk and in the lower pyrex disk mean temperature of..
from these data the computed thermal conductivity of the unfrozen sample was thus ku shows typical evolution of temperature with time for solid rock cylinder granite at two testing temperatures..
in the left hand part of the sample was tested at temperatures below and the right hand part of shows temperature variations when the sample temperature was raised above..
as the rock cylinders are expected to have no or very little pore water no temperature threshold was observed..
the thermal conductivities measured for this sample were at the mean temperature of and at the mean temperature of..
total of thermal conductivity tests were performed in this study with tests on solid rock cylinders and tests on compacted base course material samples as outlined in..
thermal conductivity of solid particles ks the thermal conductivity of each rock cylinder presented in is the mean of two measurements made at mean temperatures of about and..
typical variations of less than were observed between the values obtained at both temperatures..
the thermal conductivity of solid rock varied from for the syenite sample to for the quartzite sample..
intermediate values of and were obtained for gabbro limestone granites and dolostone and sandstone respectively..
gives the mean values of thermal conductivity computed from data published by horai for different families of minerals that form the rocks studied herein where quartz mineral has the highest thermal conductivity value of and plagioclase mineral labradorite has the lowest value of..
from this study it follows that the highest thermal conductivities should be obtained for rock with the highest quartz content as mentioned by johansen..
clearly the highest thermal conductivity was obtained for the highest quartz nrc canada can..
typical data for sample of granite evolution of temperature with time in which lines represent data from thermistors as shown in sample and temperature distributions at the frozen and unfrozen steady states..
hlf height of lower heat flux huf height of upper heat flux meter..
typical data for the granite solid rock sample showing temperature variations below and above..
the second highest value of was obtained for the sandstone cylinder which is also quartz rich..
quartz content is not the only factor that may explain this ranking..
in fact high contents of chlorite dolomite olivine and pyroxene can also lead to aboveaverage thermal conductivity of rocks..
for example the dolostone studied here has the third highest value of which is primarily due to its high content of dolomite mineral with thermal conductivity of..
intermediate values of thermal conductivity were obtained limestone for granites granites and and gabbro..
syenite had the lowest thermal conductivity with value of mainly due to the total absence of quartz mineral..
all of these values compare well with the typical range of thermal conductivities of rocks as shown in which lists nrc canadacôté and konrad..
thermal conductivity of solids particles of the materials tested..
average thermal conductivity of rocks computed from various sources..
material dolostone gabbro granite granite limestone quartzite sandstone syenite ks..
thermal conductivity of some rockforming minerals..
mineral amphibole calcite chlorite dolomite feldspar mica olivine plagioclase plagioclase labradorite pyroxene quartz mean thermal conductivity values for different types of rocks obtained from andersland and anderson birch and clark goguel johnston jumikis missenard and..
thermal conductivity of compacted base course materials the bulk results of the thermal conductivity measurements are shown as function of water content by weight in for unfrozen compacted base course materials and as function of ice content by weight in for the frozen state..
since water content and ice content by weight are equal the symbol and the term water content are used for both unfrozen and frozen states..
it is noted that the apparent data scattering for granite is primarily due to variations of dry density in the samples..
this is discussed in more detail later in the paper..
as anticipated the thermal conductivity has general tendency to increase with an increase in water content as water ice is much better heat conductor than air..
this is schematically shown by the broken lines..
for example at water contents of and the quartzite sample displayed thermal conductivities of and respectively in the unfrozen state and and in the frozen state..
these data also reveal that at water contents higher than the thermal conductivity of the materials in the frozen state is higher than that in the unfrozen state which is consistent with the fact that ice has thermal conductivity almost four times higher than that of water..
it is also well known that the thermal conductivity of soil increases with material anorthosite basalt diabase dolostone gabbro gneiss granite limestone marble quartzite sandstone schist shale syenite trapp rock ks..
thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials as function of water content..
increasing dry density and with increasing thermal conductivity of solid particles as outlined in more detail later in the paper..
to study the effect of dry density on thermal conductivity several samples of material labelled granite were compacted with various compaction energies and different grainsize distributions from gravel to coarse sand..
dry densities ranging from to were thus obtained..
it is obvious from that for constant water content and constant thermal conductivity of solid particles the thermal conductivity of unfrozen material increased systematically with increasing dry density..
at constant water content of samples with dry densities of and have thermal conductivities of about and respectively..
although not shown here the same trend was nrc canada can..
thermal conductivity of frozen base course materials as function of water content..
thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials as function of water content and thermal conductivity of solid particles..
thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials as function of water content and dry density obtained herein..
it is also noted that results for the granite samples having the same dry density display about the same results thus confirming that the measurements are repeatable..
results for materials of various mineralogical compositions enable the study of the effect of thermal conductivity of solid particles on the variations of thermal conductivity of soils..
clearly shows that for constant water contents and dry density value of about the thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials increases with increasing thermal conductivity of solid particles ks for instance at water content of crushed gabbro ks has thermal conductivity of about crushed granite ks has value of crushed sandstone ks has value ks of has value of again this trend was also observed for the materials in the frozen state..
and crushed quartzite about observed for the frozen samples..
these results compare well with data from kersten for crushed granite and crushed feldspar with estimated thermal conductivities of and respectively based on the mineralogical composition as computed with the geometric mean method which is discussed in the next section..
both materials used by kersten had mean dry density of about and the relationship between and lies between those of the granite samples having dry densities of and which indicates the consistency of the results evaluation of current prediction models the measurement of thermal conductivity of soils in the laboratory is often time consuming and necessitates very precise instrumentation..
prediction models of the thermal conductivity using basic soil properties such as water content degree of saturation dry density or porosity are thus particularly useful to perform thermal analyses of earth structures..
at this point it is of value to evaluate the ability to predict the thermal conductivity of unfrozen frozen basecourse materials of two of the most used empirical models which were developed by kersten and johansen..
since johansen model requires ks as input the geometric mean method for estimating ks using mineralogical nrc canadacôté and konrad..
predicted thermal conductivity kcalculated of unfrozen base course materials using kersten model versus actual values kmeasured..
composition is evaluated with the results obtained for the solid quartzite and solid gabbro samples from this study..
geometric mean method for estimating ks the wide variety of thermal conductivity values for the rock forming minerals found in and the results obtained in this study reveal that the knowledge of the complete mineralogy of the rock is necessary for an accurate assessment of the rock thermal conductivity..
based on the mineralogical composition the value of ks in for rock sample can be computed from the generalized geometric mean method as expressed by eq..
method that was successfully used by and woodside and messmer loam..
these materials had relatively high quartz contents ranging from to..
the textures of these soils were very different from poorly graded gravel to sandy loam with porosity ranging from to for chena river gravel to for fairbanks sand to for lowell sand and to for dakota sandy loam..
the relationships proposed by kersten for the prediction of thermal conductivity of sandy soils for unfrozen and frozen states were converted to si units by andersland and anderson and are given by eqs..
where ku and kf are the thermal conductivity for unfrozen and frozen conditions is the water content and is the dry density..
and compare the predicted values of thermal conductivities kcalculated using these equations with the experimental results kmeasured obtained for the materials of this study in both unfrozen and frozen states..
it is worth recalling that for each material low thermal conductivities in nrc canada where represents the product of the thermal conductivity of the minerals km raised to the power of their volumetric proportion and the sum of the volumetric proportion of the minerals is equal to..
the subscript refers to the jth mineral there being minerals altogether..
gives the best results when the thermal conductivity of each mineral does not contrast by more than one order of magnitude..
the complete mineralogical compositions for the quartzite and the gabbro in this study were available from their respective quarries..
the quartzite consisted of quartz plagioclase calcite and mica and the gabbro consisted of labradorite plagioclase calcite quartz and chlorite..
and the thermal conductivities for rock forming minerals given in the computed thermal conductivity is ks..
for the quartzite and ks..
these computed values compare well with the measured thermal conductivities for the quartzite and gabbro of and respectively and tend to confirm the validity of the geometric mean method for the assessment of the thermal conductivity of solid particles of crushed rock..
the computed and measured values also compare well with data from the literature as given in where the mean values for quartzite and gabbro are and respectively..
kersten model kersten work on the thermal conductivity of soils still remains the most extensive study of its kind..
over measurements were made on different soil types including gravels crushed rocks sands silts clays and peat..
however the results from only nine of these soils were used to develop the empirical relationships between thermal conductivity water content and dry density for both unfrozen and frozen states..
the influence of fabric is highlighted because different relationships were necessary to fit the experimental results for silt and clay and for sandy soils..
the model for sandy soils which is generally used by pavement engineers to estimate the thermal conductivity for base course and subbase course materials was calibrated with the data obtained from chena river gravel fairbanks coarse sand lowell medium sand and dakota sandy with..
predicted thermal conductivity of frozen base course material using kersten model versus actual values..
where kru and krf represent the normalized thermal conductivity for the unfrozen and frozen states respectively..
the thermal conductivity is normalized with respect to the thermal conductivities of the saturated and fully dried..
kr kdry ksat kdry where is the thermal conductivity of the soil for given water and ksat and kdry are the thermal conductivities of the saturated and dry soil respectively..
the degree of saturation is obtained from eq..
sr where is the water content fraction is the density of water is the dry density of the sample and is the porosity..
johansen obtained single relationships between the normalized thermal conductivity and the degree of saturation which can be viewed as normalized water content..
moreover he suggested that empirical relationships between kr and sr must satisfy the following..
it is noted that eq..
does not satisfy the first condition given in eq..
since log is equal to the thermal conductivities..
in the unfrozen state ku and in the frozen state kf are then computed when rearranging eq..
as ku ksat kdry kru kdry kf ksat kdry krf kdry to compute the thermal conductivity of the saturated soil johansen proposed using the well accepted method of the geometric mean..
it is noted that this equation gives satisfying results when the ratio of the thermal conductivity of the solid particles to that of the water or the ice is lower than..
sat sat where ks kw and ki are the thermal conductivity of the solid particles in water and ice and is the porosity of soil and can be computed using..
where is the density of solid particles..
johansen did not consider the effect of volume change from water to ice on the sample porosity and on the degree of saturation of frozen soils..
the thermal conductivity in of solid particles is inferred from the quartz content using dicate low water contents and higher thermal conductivities indicate higher water contents..
as seen in predictions for the unfrozen samples made with kersten model generally lead to values that are higher than the actual values..
the predicted thermal conductivities for crushed gabbro can be up to four times higher than the measured values..
for dolostone granites and limestone and syenite the calculated values for the highest water content are about twice as high as the measured values..
negative values are also obtained in the low water content domain..
the model predicted the values for crushed sandstone and quartzite quite well however..
for actual values of less than kersten model predicts negative thermal conductivities which are physically unacceptable..
johansen model johansen developed his model using data from kersten with the normalized thermal conductivity concept kr..
as johansen model considered the mineralogy of soils he used kersten data in more systematic manner than kersten himself..
all natural soils were used to develop relationships between kr and the degree of saturation sr one for unfrozen fine grained soils silty and clayey soils one for unfrozen coarse grained soils medium and fine sands and unique relationship for both frozen fineand coarsegrained soils..
crushed rock and chena river gravel were not considered in the coarse grained soil family..
relationships for the coarse grained soils which again are used by pavement engineers to estimate the thermal conductivity of basecourse and subbase materials were given as nrc canada..
predicted thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials using johansen model versus actual values..
where is the volume fraction of quartz in the solid particles..
johansen stressed that the thermal conductivity of dry soil displays high sensitivity to dry density or porosity and microstructure variations whereas the mineralogical influence is rather negligible..
he experimentally observed that dry crushed rocks displayed systematically higher thermal conductivities than natural this was also pointed out by smith..
on the basis of his experimental observations johansen proposed two empirical relationships to assess the thermal conductivity in of dry natural soils and ii dry crushed rocks..
the relationship for crushed rocks is given by kdry accurate the predicted values of thermal conductivity using johansen model for the materials studied in this paper are presented in and for the unfrozen and frozen states respectively..
these predictions are generally more than those obtained with kersten model because johansen model considers the thermal conductivity of solid particles especially for water contents near saturation..
few negative values at low water contents for unfrozen materials are still obtained in however..
moreover predicted thermal conductivities for the nearly dry limestone and dry syenite samples are about four times higher than the measured values..
for dolostone and sandstone the predicted thermal conductivity in the dry state is approximately equal the nearly saturated state..
furthermore significant differences were observed for the limestone and syenite samples..
to that for as the kr sr relationship is linear for the frozen state no negative or underpredicted values are observed in..
the model still leads to overpredicted values for the nearly dry states however..
discussion of the models given that the evaluated models were developed for sandy soils it not surprising that they are less suited to the coarser base course materials studied in this paper..
moreover the use of logarithmical functions of water content kersten or degree of saturation johansen can lead to predictions of negative thermal conductivites which are not desirable for automated numerical applications..
furthermore kersten model does not consider the thermal conductivity of solid particles which has significant influence on the thermal conductivity of base course materials as shown by the results of this study..
johansen took this parameter partially into account since he considered solely quartz content in his equations..
this simplified method can lead to significant errors for given types of materials like the syenite sample for which the predicted thermal conductivity of solid particles using eq..
would be is only whereas..
it was also noticed that the relationship for the prediction of kdry using johansen model seems to be inadequate for very dense base course materials and leads to unrealistic values..
the measured value despite these limitations the concept of the normalized..
predicted thermal conductivity of frozen base course materials using johansen model versus actual values..
thermal conductivity proposed by johansen looks appropriate for the development of an improved model to assess the thermal conductivity of base course materials..
vol development of an improved model for base course materials as discussed previously prediction of the thermal conductivity of base course materials using the normalized thermal conductivity model leads to less dispersed values than kersten model..
farouki evaluated many theoretical and empirical models for the computation of thermal conductivity of soils..
in general the model proposed by johansen gave the bests results in the widest range of soils and degrees of saturation..
improvements to the kr model are thus proposed to adapt it to dense and broadly graded base course materials..
an existing method for determination of the thermal conductivity of solid particles which considers the complete mineralogy is reviewed..
modified form of the geometric mean method is proposed to assess kdry and mathematical equations that relate kr to sr which fully satisfy the conditions given by eq..
are developed for unfrozen and frozen base course materials..
porosity and degree of saturation of frozen soil the freezing of pore water may induce volume change of the sample as pore water expands by about when it turns into ice..
this will then lead to higher porosity in the frozen state than in the unfrozen state..
for saturated soils freezing in closed system the volume of voids will increase by leading to the porosity of saturated frozen soil nf nf where nu is the porosity of the unfrozen soil as expressed by eq..
as no volume change is expected in dry soil when its temperature goes below..
its porosity is equal to that of the unfrozen soil nf nu..
considering that the volume of voids in the frozen soil increases linearly from nu dry state to nf saturated state as function of water content the degree of saturation of frozen soil srf can be obtained from the degree of saturation of the unfrozen soil sru eq..
although it is important to consider volume change in the laboratory especially when samples are freezing in closed system field conditions often lead to open system freezing and porosity change may be negligible in relatively highly pervious soils such as clean sands and gravels..
thermal conductivity of solid particles ks the thermal conductivity of solid particles has an important influence on the thermal conductivity of base course materials..
this parameter is used for the assessment of thermal conductivity of saturated soils..
johansen computes the thermal conductivity of solid particles using eq..
in which the thermal conductivities of the minerals other than quartz are equal to..
when the quartz content is lower than the thermal conductivity of minerals other than quartz is equal to..
comparison of johansen simplified method and the generalized method was made with the measurements by birch and clark on various types of rocks..
shows the mineralogical compositions and the measured thermal conductivities compared with the computed thermal conductivities using eqs..
and in conjunction with values from horai..
all the computed values using the generalized method eq..
show differences of less than when compared with the measured values..
the differences obtained using johansen method are generally below for rock with quartz content higher than which is considered acceptable but for materials with no quartz content the differences increase up to from the measured values..
it is thus proposed to use eq..
to compute the thermal conductivity of solid particles using the thermal conductivity of the forming minerals..
mean values of thermal conductivity for the major families of rock forming minerals are found in..
complete data for most rock forming minerals are given in horai..
when the mineralogical composition of rocks is not available thermal conductivity tests can be performed on solid rock cylinders or saturated crushed rock samples..
otherwise typical thermal conductivity values taken from can be used directly in eq..
to compute the thermal conductivity of saturated materials..
thermal conductivity of dry materials kdry thermal conductivity measurements were made on samples dried in an oven at temperature of for since most of the samples still contained small amounts of water thermal conductivity at the dry state was extrapolated from the relationships obtained between ku and sru and between kf and srf for each sample as indicated in by the left hand arrow..
the theoretical value of thermal conductivity at the saturated state eq..
was also used to improve curve fitting..
values of kdry are shown in where four distinct relationships are one for the quartzite materials ks one for the sandstone and dolostone materials ks and one for the gabbro limestone granite and granite materials ks to and one for the syenite materials ks..
the fairly good correlations obtained between kdry values and porosity confirm the high sensitivity of thermal conductivity of dry materials to variations in porosity observed by smith and johansen..
from the four general correlations obtained in it can also be concluded that mineralogical composition plays an important role in the thermal conductivity of dry crushed rock..
for example at porosity of the thermal conductivity of dry syenite ks is equal to that of dry sandstone ks is equal to and that of quartzite ks is equal to..
this effect tends to decrease with increasing porosity however and values of thermal conductivity seem to converge for porosity of about..
it is noted that smith and johansen did not observe significant variations in the thermal conductivity of dry crushed rocks and fragmented soils with porosities ranging from to..
the relationship proposed by johansen for dry crushed rocks is also shown in eq..
even if this function tends to similar values at higher porosities it is clear that the use of eq..
gives values that nrc canada..
determination of the thermal conductivity of dried materials from experimental data and theoretical values of the thermal conductivity of saturated materials..
influence of porosity on the thermal conductivity of dry base course materials..
are far overpredicted for materials other than quartzite at porosities between and..
the effect of mineralogy on the thermal conductivity of dry crushed rocks can be taken into account by using the geometric mean method as expressed by eq..
where ka thermal conductivity of air replaces kw or ki..
it is generally accepted that the geometric mean method gives satisfactory results when the ratio of thermal conductivity of solids to that of fluids kfl is lower than..
with air being the fluid kfl is between and for the materials studied nrc canada apercenterrorisgiveninparentheses..
mean eq geometric thermalconductivity ks olivineothermeasured augite pyroxene hornblende amphibole biotite mica bytownite plagioclase albite plagioclase orthoclase feldspar quartz gabbro mellen gabbro frenchcreek diabase westfield diabase vinalhaven diabase maryland syenite tonalite quartzmonzonite granite westerley granite barre granite rockport rock measuredandcomputedthermalconductivityofrocks..
mineral côté and konrad can..
predicted versus measured thermal conductivity of dry materials using eq..
normalized thermal conductivity of unfrozen basecourse materials versus the degree of saturation..
herein leading to predicted values higher than the values obtained from laboratory results..
modified form of the geometric mean method was thus developed as expressed by eq..
in where fitting parameters and were set to and to fit experimental..
this modified form of the geometric mean method respects the physical limits of thermal conductivity for the full range of porosities kdry..
calculated values of kdry using eq..
for the materials of this study are generally within of error compared with measured values as shown in..
normalized thermal conductivity kr the thermal conductivity measured for each sample was normalized according to eq..
using the thermal conductivities in the saturated state derived from eq..
in the dry state as extrapolated from the sr relationships..
the results are presented in for the unfrozen state and in for the frozen state..
similar to the model of johansen the normalized thermal conductivity can be related to the degree of saturation to obtain single relationships for the frozen and unfrozen states except that the degree of saturation is now defined according to eqs..
simple mathematical equations that satisfy the conditions of eq..
are proposed to express the normalized thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials eq..
as functions of the degree of saturation..
it is noted that these equations fit most of the experimental data within range of normalized thermal conductivity of as outlined by the thinner lines in and kru..
normalized thermal conductivity of frozen base course materials versus the degree of saturation..
krf the relationship for the frozen materials has less curved shape than that observed for the unfrozen materials..
this is mainly due to the fact that in the frozen state ice has higher thermal conductivity which gives higher saturated thermal conductivities in the frozen state than in the unfrozen state..
the relationships obtained by johansen for medium and fine sands are also shown using broken lines in and..
it appears that the use of johansen rela nrc canadacôté and konrad..
mineralogical composition and computed thermal conductivity of solid particles for gravels and coarse sands..
mineral material quartz orthoclase plagioclase chena river gravel fairbanks sand crushed quartz crushed trapp rock crushed feldspar crushed granite tionship for unfrozen base course materials would slightly underpredict kr values and give negative values at the nearly dry state..
the linear relationship that johansen obtained between kr and sr will also underpredict the kr values in the frozen state..
the differences between his relationships and those proposed herein can be attributed to fabric effect as the materials studied here are of coarser nature than the medium and fine sand that johansen used to develop his model for coarse soil..
evaluation of the model more than experimental data measured by kersten were compared with values computed using the proposed model..
these data were obtained for gravels chena river gravel test results and coarse sands fairbanks sand tests crushed quartz test crushed feldspar test crushed trap rock test and crushed granite test results..
the proportion of grains over mm in size was equal to for the chena river gravel and ranged from to for the coarse sands compared with proportions between and for the materials studied herein..
the samples were tested in the unfrozen and frozen states at the compaction water content only resulting in nearly different samples with porosity ranging from to and degrees of saturation from to..
it is noted that the experimental data for the crushed rocks were not used either by kersten or by to develop their respective models..
no johansen tests were made to determine the thermal conductivity of the solid particles but complete mineralogical compositions were given by kersten making it possible to estimate the ks values using eq..
and the thermal conductivities of minerals from horai..
presents the mineralogical compositions and the computed ks values for the gravels and coarse sands..
comparative results of computed thermal conductivity using the proposed model with the experimental data from this study and from kersten are shown in and for the unfrozen and frozen state respectively..
the parameters ksat ksat kdry and kru and krf were computed using eqs..
as anticipated the improved model accurately predicts the thermal conductivity for the materials in this study with differences from the experimental data of less than for the unfrozen state and less than for the frozen state..
the model also provided fairly good predictions for kersten coarse sands and gravels with errors of generally less than for the unolivine amphibole pyroxene magnetite hematite mica other ks computed eq..
predicted thermal conductivity of unfrozen base course materials using the proposed model versus actual values..
frozen state and generally less than for the frozen state..
these larger but acceptable differences from an engineering point of view probably reflect the differences in fabric between kersten materials and the materials studied here..
methodology to assess the thermal conductivity of base course materials the thermal conductivity of base course materials can be very simply assessed using the relationships developed in this paper in four step method outlined as follows..
material characterization knowledge is needed of basic soil parameters such as the degree of saturation sr and the porosity in the unfrozen state the porosity nu and degree of saturation sru can be calculated using eqs..
to consider the volume change from water to ice occurring during freezing periods the porosity nf and degree of saturation srf in the frozen state are obtained from eqs..
when freezing occurs in an open system allowing for drainage of unfrozen water the volume nrc canada can..
predicted thermal conductivity of frozen base course materials using the proposed model versus actual values..
method for assessment of the thermal conductivity of base course materials..
change effect can be neglected nf is equal to nu and srf is equal to sru..
the origin of the material must also be known to determine the type of rock granite gabbro limestone etc that composes the base course material..
this information is generally found in the quarries that provide the material..
although not absolutely necessary mineralogical analysis of the rocks can be useful to obtain more accurate predictions..
thermal conductivity of saturated and dried materials the thermal conductivity of unfrozen and frozen saturated soils ksat can be assessed using the geometric mean method given by eq..
and the thermal conductivity of the solid particles ks..
the porosity becomes equal to nu for the unfrozen state and nf for the frozen state..
the conductivity of solid particles can be taken from average values for different types of rocks given in..
when complete information on the mineralogical composition of the materials is available the thermal conductivity of solid particles can be computed with the generalized geometric mean method eq..
and the mean thermal conductivity values for various families of minerals found in or horai..
the thermal conductivity of the dry materials kdry is obtained using eq..
the evolution of unfrozen and frozen normalized thermal conductivity the normalized thermal conductivity allows the characterization of thermal conductivity between the limit values obtained from the saturated and dry states as function of degree of saturation..
the unfrozen normalized thermal conductivity value kru is computed using eq..
and that of the frozen state krf using eq..
unfrozen and frozen thermal conductivity the thermal conductivity in the unfrozen and frozen states is directly computed from eqs..
and respectively using the values of ksat kdry and kr determined in steps the last three steps of the method are summarized in..
working example the use of the new approach is illustrated with working example in which the thermal conductivity of the unfrozen and frozen sample presented in is computed..
the sample is crushed granite with dry density of and water content of..
the density of the solid particles is equal to and typical mineralogical composition is used for the purpose of this quartz plagioclase and feldspar..
the first step in the methodology is to determine the porosity and degree of saturation in the unfrozen state using eqs..
as the sample was tested in closed system the volume change effect is taken into account for frozen conditions using eqs..
and for porosity nu nf and ii for degree of saturation sru sr..
srf in the second step the thermal conductivity of the solid particles the thermal conductivities of unfrozen and frozen saturated materials and the thermal conductivity of the dry materials are determined using eqs..
and for solid particles ks ii for saturated unfrozen material ksat iii for saturated frozen material ksat nrc canadacôté and konrad and iv for dry material kdry..
the third step gives the normalized thermal conductivity for unfrozen and frozen material using eqs..
and for unfrozen material kru..
and ii for frozen material degree of saturation for base course materials in the unfrozen and frozen states..
the new model was put to the test with more than data available from kersten for gravels and coarse sands..
the predicted values generally agreed with the measured values within errors less than for unfrozen materials and less than for frozen samples..
lastly step by step method with working example was proposed to assess the thermal conductivity of base course materials..
krf acknowledgements in the fourth and last step the thermal conductivity in of the moist sample in the unfrozen and the frozen states is given by eqs..
and for unfrozen material ku and ii for frozen material kf these computed values compare well with the measured values for the tests shown in where ku and kf are and respectively..
conclusion comprehensive laboratory study of the thermal conductivity of dense and broadly graded base course materials was conducted on materials selected from eight quarries along the axis of the st lawrence river..
nearly tests on unfrozen and frozen compacted base course samples and solid rock cylinders were performed in thermal conductivity cell using pyrex heat flux meters..
as anticipated the experimental results indicated that the thermal conductivity is strongly influenced by water content porosity of the samples and mineralogy of the solid particles of the materials..
these results compared well with the limited data available from the literature..
empirical models from kersten and johansen were evaluated to determine their ability to predict thermal conductivity of base course materials..
unsatisfactory results were obtained with both models for most of the unfrozen and frozen samples studied..
this was attributed to differences in the fabric of the soils used to calibrate the models and the fabric of the materials studied in this paper..
the normalized thermal conductivity concept used by johansen however was found appropriate to develop new model adapted to the prediction of the thermal conductivity of base course materials..
the model developed in this study relies on two relationships to compute the porosity and the degree of saturation that consider the effect of volume change as water turns to ice in frozen ii the geometric mean model for the computation of the thermal conductivity of solid particles and for the saturated base course materials in the unfrozen and frozen iii modified form of the geometric mean model for the computation of the thermal conductivity of dry base course and iv two simple relationships between the normalized thermal conductivity and the the work reported was principally supported by an operating grant from the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada nserc and the nserc chair creig chaire de recherche sur exploitation des infrastructures soumises au gel..
the authors wish to acknowledge pierre martin boudreau who performed the laboratory testing and also fran ois gilbert and julie cumming for help in the development of the thermal conductivity cell..
geotechnical engineering for cold regions..
the thermal conductivity of rocks and its dependence upon temperature and composition..
freeman and company new york..
conductivité hydraulique de matériaux de fondation de chaussées partiellement saturés..
mémoire de ma trise université laval sainte foy que..
côté and konrad assessment of the hydraulic characteristics of unsaturated base course practical method for pavement engineers..
in physics of plant environment..
north holland publishing company amsterdam the netherlands..
crrel monograph us army corps of engineers cold regions research and engineering laboratory hanover farouki..
evaluation of methods for calculating soil thermal conductivity..
crrel report us army corps of engineers cold regions research and engineering laboratory hanover goguel..
thermal conductivity of rock forming minerals..
thesis university of trondheim trondheim norway..
crrel draft english translation us army corps of engineers cold regions research and engineering laboratory hanover johnston..
permafrost engineering design and construction..
rutgers the state university of new jersey new brunswick nrc canada can..
laboratory research for the determination of the thermal properties of soils..
research laboratory investigations engineering experiment station technical report university of minnesota minneapolis minn king..
thermal conductivity measurements on saturated rocks at permafrost temperatures..
canadian journal of earth sciences..
thermal conductivity of moist soil..
american institute of electrical engineers transactions..
conductivité thermique des solides liquides gaz et de leurs mélanges..
thermal conductivity of selected materials..
granitoid plutons form essential constituents of collisional belts..
arises from different source compositions variable melting conditions complex chemical and physical interactions between mafic and felsic magmas and crustal contamination patino douce..
it has been suggested that tonalitic to granitic calc alkaline magmas may be generated by dehydration melting of fertile portions of the continental crust at temperatures above and rapp rapp and patino douce patino douce and beard patino douce and thompson and references therein..
calculated pressure temperature time paths for continental collision brown thompson and have shown temperatures in excess of within the that tectonic circumcontinental crust require unusual stances such as slow exhumation allowing for longtime heating see patino douce and for discussion..
this has led several authors to propose an advective input of heat from the mantle into the continental crust and sparks bergantz and von..
tous occurrence of mafic dioritic to gabbroic rocks as microgranular enclaves in more felsic hosts or as separate intrusive bodies suggests direct chemical input from the mantle since extremely high in excess of must be temperatures achieved to generate such magmas byo undersaturated partial melting of mafic crustal source rocks rapp rapp and patino..
in many cases mafic plutonic rocks associated with more felsic granitoids display enriched chemical and nd isotopic signatures allen elburg galan et von compatible with an origin from lithospheric rather than depleted asthenospheric mantle sources..
it has been shown that intensive mass transfer between mafic globules and felsic host magma seems to be the rule rather than the exception elburg and rapid chemical and isotopic exchange between coexisting mafic and felsic magmas is also suggested by experimental evidence and lesher..
as consequence uncertainty as to the origin and significance of enclaves has led many investigators to ignore their potential value as documents of magma sources..
furthermore mafic intrusions in collisional belts occur as sporadically distributed late stage rich lamprophyric dikes von with no obvious genetic relationship to the main volume of granitoid rocks..
therefore the question as to whether mantle derived mafic magmas could form significant mass portion of granitoid plutons in collisional belts remains highly debated..
the internal domains of the european variscides saxothuringian and moldanubian zones of kossmat..
are characterized by exceptionally large volumes of early carboniferous granitoid rocks whereby peraluminoustype granites and predominate and mafic intrusions are volumet rically insignificant didier sabatier schaltegger..
this has led many authors to neglect..
sketch of the central european variscides showing the rhenohercynian saxothuringian and moldanubian mz zones of kossmat..
geological sketchof vosges and schwarzwald with dextral shear zones of..
lalaye and baden baden bbz representing the boundary between the saxothuringian and moldanubian mz zones..
simplified geologicalof the northern vosges showing the various tectonic and intrusive units..
the og ns form wsw ene elongated bodies the yg show more isometric forms..
these differences suggest change in the crustal stress field after the intrusion of the og and before the intrusion of the yg geologicalof the northern schwarzwald showing the outcrops of metamorphic units and the type granite of baden baden and the two micatype granite within permian and triassic sediments..
lithos in the more relatively abundant significant mass input from the mantle during granitoid formation in this collisional belt hoefs and..
on the other hand mafic stocks and smaller plutons are external saxothuringian domain..
from the odenwald for example have been..
interpreted as subduction related mantle derived melts that were partly modified by crustal contamination and magma mingling and mixing..
dioritic rocks also form essential constituents of the northern vosges where they are slightly older than or contemporaneous with associated type and granites de..
in this paper present new geochronological geochemical and nd isotopic data on post collisional..
type granitoid plutons high diorite to granite from the northern parts of the vosges and the schwarzwald and will use these data to constrain magma sources and magma producing processes..
in the classic descriptions of the european variscan belt kossmat the northern parts of the vosges and the schwarzwald have been assigned to the saxothuringian zone..
in more recent concepts this zone is thought to consist of various units that were derived from northern lower and southern upper plate and amalgamated during late devonian to early carboniferous oblique convergence and extension the oncken..
towards saxothuringian units are in tectonic contact with high grade gneisses and migmatitic rocks of the moldanubian zone fluck krohe and eisbacher and eisbacher echtler and..
to the north of the saxothuringian zone low grade high pressurerlowtemperature metamorphic rocks occurring in the northern phyllite zone and in the southern parts of the rhenohercynian zone document early carbonifsouthward directed subduction processes erous the south..
the northern parts of the vosges and the schwarzwald are characterized by an accretionarywedge architecture with northwest ward imbrication and superimposed dextral shear krohe and eisbacher and eisbacher echtler and..
in the vosges the dextral shear zone of lalaye separates very lowgrade metamorphic units of the saxothuringian zone in the north from high grade metamorphic rocks of the moldanubian zone in the south fluck and eisbacher..
from south to north the northern vosges consist of the ville unit the steige unit and the bruche unit..
the ville unit is composed of low grade metapelitic to metapsammitic schists and quartzites clauer and bonhomme deposited during late cambrian to early ordovician time reitz and and references therein..
the ville unit is thrust over the steige unit consisting of monotonous..
low grade and bonhomme that were deposited in shallow marine environment during ordovician to silurian time doubinger muller..
the bruche unit is sedimentary and tectonic melange comprising middle devonian to early carboniferous shelf and slope sediments and calc alkaline volcanic rocks rizki and and eisbacher and references therein..
the very low grade paleozoic volcano sedimentary sequences were intruded by various plutons of dioritic to granitic compositions causing contact metamorphism de von leterrier..
in the northern schwarzwald three tectonic units of different structural and metamorphic evolution have been distinguished..
unit consists of high grade gneisses and amphibolites gpa that show similarities to high grade rocks of the moldanubian domain..
unit comprises kyanite garnet mica schists and quartzites gpa..
that are chemically similar to the metaclastics of the ville unit in the vosges muller..
unit is represented by low grade metasediments and metavolcanics gpa..
to late silurian age of this unit..
post accretionary intrusion of hornblende biotite granite into the low grade metamorphics of unit caused contact metamorphism reaching temperatures of at the contact..
rock units and age constraints..
and isolated dioritic plugs on the basis of intrusive relations and mineralogical and geochemical arguments the plutonic rocks from the northern vosges can be classified into five suites see also von de de la roche and leterrier early carboniferous plutonic activity started with the intrusion of mafic magmas resulting in more or less continuous band of diorite in the south..
unit in the north muckenbach unit..
in the south of the bande mediane more or less continuous zone of early carboniferous calc alkaline volcanics the granodioritic units of hohwald south hohwald north and champ du feu south build up the southern suite..
in the north of the bande mediane the type granitic intrusions of champ du feu north..
waldersbach also known as granite de la serva and fouday form the northern suite ns..
the younger type granites yg of natzwiller and senones were intrusively emplaced into the older plutonic rocks the late devonian to early carboniferous volcano sedimentary sequences andror the schists of steige and ville..
sions kagenfels kreuzweg grendelbruch cross cut the older plutonic rocks and their contact aureoles..
in the northern schwarzwald intrusion of the biotite hornblende granite of baden baden followed the accretion of tectonic units to along the dextral shear zone of baden baden..
petrographic characteristics of the baden baden granite are similar to those of the yg from the northern vosges..
reliable ages for the various intrusive suites are sparse..
for the oldest intrusions the diorites and reported conventional ar ages of and maon hornblende and mixture of hornblende and biotite muckenbach respectively..
obtained conventional ar age of ma and total fusion age of ma on hornblende from the diorite..
most of the published ar data on biotite and hornblende from the and the ns are affected by high amounts of chlorite documented by low abundances of..
these data scatter between about and ma and do not permit precise estimate of intrusion ages..
fusion age of maand plateau age of ma on hornblende from the hoh wald south granodiorite..
for hornblende from the champ du feu south granodiorite obtained ar and total fusion ages of and ma respectively..
for mineral separate from dioritic enclave in the..
waldersbach granite ns that consisted of about hornblende and intergrown biotite..
contents and age results of the conventional and the arr ar total fusion measurements on hornblende hbl and biotite bt..
hbl bt hbl hbl hbl ar age ma this concentrate contains around of intergrown biotite..
arr ar age ma lithos..
obtained ar and total fusion ages of ma biotite from the waldersbach granite itself yielded ar age of ma..
for biotite from the natzwiller granite yg faul and jager published ar and ages of and ma respectively recalculated with new constants..
relatively high ar age of ma on biotite was given by and..
the same biotite yielded total fusion age of ma and plateau age of ma..
obtained conventional ar age of ma on biotite concentrate..
hornblende sample from the senones granite yg yielded ar and ages of and ma respectively..
published ages for biotite from the granite yg are not reliable due to low contents..
one biotite sample including minor amounts of chlorite yielded ar age of ma table..
the emplacement age of the kagenfelstype granite has been constrained at ma by on the basis of conventional ar and total fusion data on biotite as well as single zircon radiogenic pb ratios..
this age is corroborated by total fusion age of ma on biotite published by..
in conclusion suggest that intrusive emplacement of all the granitoids from the northern vosges took place within limited time interval between about and ma..
major elements and the trace elements ba th nb zr cr and ni were determined by wavelength dispersive ray fluorescence spectrometry xrf using standard techniques..
the trace elements cs th ta and and the rare earth elements ree of selected samples kg were determined..
by instrumental neutron activation analysis inaa at karlsruhe university..
for the determination of ferrous iron about..
mg sample powder were decomposed in platinum crucible by adding hfrhso..
sample were then submerged into boric acid solution and the ferrous iron liberated was titrated using potassium permanganate as an indicator..
was determined by the karl fischer titration method..
co was analyzed by ir gas absorption spectrometry after inductive heating and combustion of the sample in an oxygen atmosphere..
for determination of and nd isotope ratios sample powders were decomposed in hclo teflon bombs at for one week..
and nd were separated by conventional ion exchange techniques and analyzed on singleand double filaments respectively..
total procedure blanks are pg for and pg for and nd and they are negligible for the samples of this study..
detailed description of the analytical procedures is given by..
isotope ratios were measured on finnigan mat multicollector mass spectrometer employing static mode for and and dynamic multiple mass collection routine for nd isotope ratios are normalized to..
during the course of this study four analyses of nbs gave and two analyses of gave srr..
within run errors are less than and external precision of population is estimated to..
xrf data with confidence limits of were used to calculate ratios..
nd isotope ratios are normalized to nd..
measurements of the la jolla standard provided value of nd..
two analyses of the reference material yielded nd ppm ppm nd and nd..
within run errors on nd ratios are and the external precision is estimated to be better than at the confidence level..
rock textures and modal compositions apart from local shear zones and pseudotachylite veins all the granitoids including mafic microgranular enclaves display isotropic igneous textures..
crodioritic enclaves from the waldersbach granite ns have diameters up to few meters and are characterized by fine grained rims and acicular hornblende and apatite grains as well as thin platy biotite crystals nadeldiorit..
such textures suggest rapid cooling quenching in colder granite host magma..
in the hohwald south granodiorite larger feldspar grains may occur along the..
boundary between enclaves diameters up to cm..
pressure estimates for granitoids from the northern vosges obtained from in hornblende barometryerrors..
sample rock type pressure gpadiorites from and muckenbach biotite hornblende diorite biotite hornblende diorite biotite hornblende diorite southern granodioritic suite..
cfs biotite hornblende granodiorite hornblende diorite enclave biotite hornblende granodiorite biotite hornblende granodiorite northern granitic suite ns biotite hornblende diorite enclave..
younger granites yg nw hornblende biotite diorite enclave hornblende biotite granite hornblende biotite granite and host rock indicating mingling of dioritic and granodioritic magmas..
modal compositions in terms of quartz alkali feldspar and plagioclase are plotted in..
among the older granitoids og rocks from the display restricted range of granodioritic microgranular enclaves from the hohwald south unit are diorites..
rocks from the ns are transitional between granodiorite and granite..
these rocks will be collectively referred to as granites in the following..
the waldersbach granite contains microgranular enclaves of dioritic to tonalitic compositions..
rocks from the and muckenbach units are always dioritic..
as compared with the older granites from the ns the yg from the vosges and the schwarzwald tend to have lower..
in the granite yg have dioritic compositions..
the diorites from and muckenbach consist of hornblende biotite plagioclase minor amounts of quartz and titanite apatite magnetite zircon and alkali feldspar as accessory phases..
from the are all very similar and contain biotite hornblende magnetite titanite apatite allanite and zircon besides plagioclase orthoclase and..
modal compositions of representative type granitoid samples from the northern vosges and schwarzwald in terms of quartz alkali feldspar and plagioclase..
samples from the northern ns and southern intrusive samples from the..
ns granites display heterogenous textures ranging from more porphyric varieties waldersbach to more equigranular types champ du feu..
besides plagioclase and quartz these granites contain biotite titanite allanite apatite zircon and magnetite..
the fouxmajor and trace element ppm abundances in representative samples from the different intrusive rock suites..
dioritic suite muckenbach diorites hohwald south hohwald north champ du feu south cfs..
champ du feu north cfn waldersbach fouday..
natzwiller nw senones baden baden schwarzwald bb rock hornblende diorite granodiorite gdr granite..
see text for analytical techniques..
hbl hbl hbl hbl hbl gdr hbl..
intrusive unit sample rock type sio tio..
day granite locally contains small amounts of hornblende..
the yg tend to have porphyritic textures with larger orthoclase crystals in medium grained matrix consisting of plagioclase orthoclase quartz biotite and small amounts of hornblende titanite apatite allanite zircon and magnetite..
feo mno mgo cao na..
intrusive unit sample rock type lithos..
selected harker variation diagrams for type granitoids from the northern vosges and schwarzwald illustrating some of the chemical contrasts that distinguish the different intrusive rock suites..
note that for similar sio the yg tend to have higher abundances of large ion lithophile elements th ba la nb and but lower abundances of yb and than the older ns and granitoids..
from the have significantly lower abundances of zr than granites from the ns..
some of the granitoids from the northern vosges contain the critical mineral assemblage hornblende biotiteq plagioclaseq alkalifeldsparq quartz qtitaniteq titanomagnetiteq apatite that together..
is required for application of the inwith melt hornblende barometer..
for our pressure estimates used rim compositions of hornblende grains in contact with quartz and alkalifeldspar..
cation calculations were based on oxygens and cation number of excluding ca na and pressure values tend to decrease in the order of decreasing intrusion age from the..
diorite via the and ns granites to the yg..
whereas the pressure of about gpa deduced for the intrusion and final cystallization of the diorite corresponds to depth of about km the yg solidified at significantly shallower depths of about km..
greater intrusion depth of the diorite as compared to the other plutonic rock units is further suggested by the occurrence of pseudotachylite veins at the type locality..
whole rock chemistry in the course of this study total of fresh granitoid samples from the different intrusive units..
variation of some trace elements in granitoids from the northern vosges and schwarzwald..
note that yg samples plot to the high rbrhigh side of the trend defined by the og..
ba vs srrnd diagram displaying higher abundances of ba in the yg as compared with the og..
covariation ofeu cnchondrite normalized and srrnd ratios cn suggesting fractionation of plagioclase as major cause of the negative eu anomalies..
lithos were collected for analysis..
twenty two selected chemical analyses of representative samples are given in..
in addition samples from the diorite and the and senones granites represent reference the international geochemical samples dr and proposed values for..
chondrite normalized ree abundance patterns normalized to values given by boynton for representative samples from the northern vosges and schwarzwald..
diorites from and muckenbach from the southern granodioritic suite..
hohwald south hohwald north and champ du feu south cfs granites from the northern..
granitic suite ns champ du feu north cfn waldersbachand fouday mafic enclaves diorites from the granodiorite..
and yg from and baden baden bb yg from senonesand natzwiller nw..
dr and were taken from and roelandts and barnes and nolan..
verma and reddy and pant..
these samples and roelandts and barnes and nolan verma reddy and pant have been included in..
this study ree data for some..
the samples span range of sio from about to including diorites dioritic to tonalitic mafic enclaves and granites and..
all samples are calc alkaline alkali lime index..
the aluminium saturation index asimolecular ocao..
na increases with sio from about to not shown with all but five samples being characterized by asi..
samples from the og units diorites ns granites exhibit poorly defined data trends..
as compared with the older granites of the ns the yg tend to have higher contents of..
th ba la nb and but lower abundances of yb and at similar sio..
using the vs sio nomenclature of illo and the og classify as high calc alkaline rocks with transitions to both normal calc alkaline and shoshonitic suites..
samples from the yg plot near to or within the shoshonitic field..
the various rock suites are most readily..
guished by means of vs diagram..
the og form continuous trend from high srrlowrb diorites via to low srrhigh granites ns..
the yg samples plot to the highrbrhigh side of this trend whereby the granite plots at an intermediate position between the og and the other yg..
in ba vs srrnd diagram the yg samples plot to the high ba side of the trend defined by samples from the og..
the systematic nature of the observed intraand intersuite variations in the abundances of and ba argues against significant post emplacement element mobility..
chondrite normalized cn ree patterns have concave upward shapes which are most pronounced in some of the yg samples..
among the og there is systematic from the northern vosges increase in both and..
ratios from the diorites via to the ns granites with increasing sio and the magnitude of the negative eu anomalieseu cn is most pronounced in the ns cn granites..
as compared with the older ns the yg show higher..
ratios and less pronounced negative eu..
cn cn cn cn cn nd and isotope data for granitoids from the northern vosges and schwarzwald..
values were calculated from xrf..
initial values nd ndr nd are based on ma for errors see section..
nd and initial isotope ratios smr nd..
rbr srr sample nd nd diorites..
cfs older granites ns cfn younger granites yg..
variation diagrams showing isotopic compositions of selected samples from the different intrusive rock suites..
initial nd value vs initial isotope ratio srr..
bulk rock srr vs sio..
nd nd anomalies and correlated with srrnd..
srr isotope ratios thirteen bulk rock nd and isotope data are listed in..
shows that there is no..
values systematic variation of initial nd..
with initial srr values show sysneither nor tematic variation with bulk rock composition sio and..
whereas the diorites the older granites from the ns and the yg show similar srr the ranges of and..
nd nd from the are characterized by significantly higher values..
since the isotopic characteristics of most microgranular enclaves are usually not representative of their primary mafic magmas but have been substantially modified by mass transfer between enclaves and hosts elburg no attempt was made to determine the nd isotopic signatures of the enclaves in the different granodioritic and granitic hosts..
nd and isotopic compositions of the type granitoids from the northern vosges and northern schwarzwald are within the range of values shown by the early carboniferous granitoids from the tectonic units ii and iii in the odenwald located in the..
our present knowledge of the central european variscides does not allow for detailed reconstruction of the plate tectonic setting in early carboniferous time oncken..
in particular there are rather poor constraints on the duration of southward directed subduction beneath the saxothuringian and moldanubian domains and the final closure of the rhenohercynian ocean..
the culmination of high pressurerlow temperature metamorphism in the northern phyllite zone and the is only southern rhenohercynian zone slightly older than ma ar on phengitic massonne and the formation of eclogites in the composite has been dated at ma by the nd method..
in the autochthon of the rhenohercynian zone east avalonia synorogenic clastic sedimentation started not later than the early carboniferous iiia representing an upper time limit for the emplacement of allochthonous units derived from the northern part of and hence for the closure of the rhenohercynian..
time constraints on the accretionary processes complex saxoforming the thuringian zone are rather poor oncken..
it is therefore not clear whether the end of accretion in the northern vosges and schwarzwald forming part of the southernmost saxothuringian zone is tantamount to the cessation of southward directed subduction..
hence the type granitoids of this study were generated either above an active subduction zone or in syn to post collisional setting..
trace element signatures of granitoid rocks do not allow for discrimination between these settings as they are strongly dependent on protolith composition..
intra pluton and intra suite olution for most elements the og as whole form poorly defined harker trends whereby the diorites display the largest scatter and both the and the ns host..
rocks show limited compositional variation..
the abundances of th ba la and nb for example increase with increasing sio whereas those of and decrease..
the og rocks also form coherent fractionation trends in other element variation diagrams such as vs ba vs srrnd and vs srrnd..
the observed systematic chemical variation of the og from diorites via to granites ns could readily be explained by increasing fractionation of plagioclase and biotite accompanied by amphibole and accessory phases such as sphene apatite at sio and zircon at sio..
such tionation trend is also suggested by the variation in modal compositions and ree patterns fig..
fractionation of amphibole should increase values of the residual melts and in more evolved systems the residual melts should develop cn ree patterns with concave upward shape as shown by the and ns samples and..
strictly comagmatic relationship of all og rocks can be ruled out by their radiogenic isotope compositions..
bewhile all og rocks show similar tween about and the of the have significantly higher values than the diorites and the ns granites..
unless distinct contamination processes are envisaged these differences in nd isotopic signatures suggest that the three og magma suites were derived from different sources..
mafic microgranular enclaves of the waldersbach granite ns and the hohwald south granodiorite fit into the element variation trends defined by the bulk of the og rocks and..
the cn ree patterns of two microdioritic enclaves are simi to those of the diorites compare and..
since microstructural evidence indicates an origin of the microgranular enclaves by mingling and mixing..
of mafic and more felsic magmas see section conclude that dioritic magmas were continuously intruded before and during the emplacement of the granodioritic and granitic magma pulses forming the and ns as compared with the older granites of the ns the yg rocks are characterized by higher abundances of lile la nb and but lower contents of and hree..
these plutons also show different trends in other element variation diagrams..
such as vs or ba vs srrnd..
their radiogenic isotope compositions are however similar to..
those of the diorites and the ns granites..
genesis of dioritic units the diorites represent the oldest magma pulses in the northern vosges..
the size of the intrusive bodies is too large to allow for substantial modification of their chemical and isotopic characteristics by the younger more felsic magma pulses forming the and ns..
therefore the chemical and isotopic signatures of these rocks have to be regarded as primary features reflecting source composition melting conditions and fractionation..
high abundances of incompatible elements and in combination with an enriched isotopic signature low..
to and relatively high srr values..
suggest either an enriched lithospheric mantle source or derivation by very large degrees of partial melting of alkaline mafic crustal rocks..
several experimental studies and rapp rapp and and references therein have shown that extremely high temperatures in excess of are required to produce mafic metaluminous low silica..
melts by dehydration melting of metabasaltic compositions..
regardless of the degree of partial melting such melts are generally characterized by lowmolar mgor mgo..
and high contents of na tures that are not shown by the diorites from the..
vosges mafic melt compositions coexist with granulite residues olivine below about gpa and with garnet granulite or eclogite residues at higher pressures rapp and..
the diorites from the vosges show nearly unfractionated hree abundances with low..
values and they have high abundances of and high ratios of srry..
these features preclude the involvement of substantial amounts of garnet either in the residue during partial melting and final reequilibration or as part of the fractionating assemblage in deep crust..
generation of the dioritic magmas by partial melting cn cn..
of mafic crustal source rocks would therefore imply that temperatures of more than about were reached in depth of less than about km corresponding to the appearance of garnet in mafic rock systems at pressures above rapp and..
such high geothermal gradients have to be regarded as highly unlikely in an overall convergent setting thompson and patino douce and and therefore conclude that the dioritic magmas were derived from enriched lithospheric mantle sources..
genesis of magmas forming the southern granodioritic and northern granitic suites..
the generation of high granodioritic to granitic magmas in convergent settings is commonly attributed to two endmember in continental arc settings parent mantle melts that are enriched in slab derived fluids may become contaminated with crustal material during ascent depaolo hildreth and in synto post collisional settings melting of crustal source rocks may occur as consequence of decompression following delamination of the lithospheric root or slab breakoff and von..
although both the and the ns were formed from several magma pulses both complexes show little internal compositional variation and there is almost no compositional overlap between them..
therefore an origin by an afc process assimilation and combined fractional depaolo is regarded as unlikely and purely crustal origin of the magmas has to be envisaged..
compositional diversity among crustal magmas may arise in part from different source compositions but variation of melting conditions such as content pressure temperature and oxygen fugacity may play an equally important role and patino douce patino douce and beard patino douce and singh and thompson and references therein..
compositional differences of magmas produced by partial melting of different source rocks such as amphibolites tonalitic gneisses metagreywackes and under variable melting conditions may lithos tot..
chemical compositions of tpye granitoids from the northern vosges and schwarzwald..
amolar mgor mgo vs sio..
note that for given sio content yg samples have higherthan the older granites ns and..
high srry shown by the yg samples may be due to higher amount of garnet in the residue during partial..
melting and segregation in crustal source..
outlined fields denote compositions of partial melts obtained in experimental studies by dehydration melting of various bulk compositions and patino douce patino douce and beard patino douce and singh and thompson and references therein..
see text for further explanation..
compared with the older and granites ns the samples from the yg are displaced towards higher orna..
be visualized in terms of molar oxide ratios such as orna feo and caor mgo feo..
metabasalts and andesites for example have lower feo and orna but higher caor mgo feo than those derived from..
on the other hand the compositions of melts derived from given source depend on intensive variables during melting..
for temperature pressureo content and example tot tot..
oxygen fugacity control both the degree of partial melting and the stability fields of residual phases..
that plagioclase biotite orthopyroxene garnet buffer melt compositions patino douce patino douce and beard..
as can be seen from and the rocks have lower values of and orna..
feo ns rocks and their magmas were most likely derived from metaigneous source rocks..
the ns granites have chemical characteristics that are more compatitot..
lithos ble with an origin from metagreywackes..
note that the have significantly higher ind..
values than the ns granites..
significant contribution from metapelitic sources to the and ns magmas their be caor mgo feo ratios are too high..
for the magmas of both complexes the concave..
upward shape of the ree patterns suggest that the amphibole out boundary was not crossed during partial melting leaving amphibole as major restite phase and garnet was not major fractionating phase..
compared with the ns granites the show higher values of eureuu and srrnd and higher abundances of suggesting smaller amount of feldspar plagioclase in their residues during magma segregation..
samples from the different yg intrusive suites show variable values of feo..
orna and caor mgo feo that in some cases are different from those of the older ns granites and..
such compositional differences may be due to variable source compositions andror melting conditions..
chemical characteristics of both granitic suites are compatible with derivation by relatively high degree of partial melting from metasedimentary sources..
relatively high abun dances of th up to..
in the granites from natzwiller senones and baden baden could be explained by exceptionally high amounts of monazite in their sources..
compared to the ns granites yg samples tend to have higherat similar sio..
this difference is most pronounced for the senones natzwiller and baden baden granites that also show the highest..
it has been shown that with increasing pressure theof granitoid partial melts increases relative to the mga..
of coexisting garnet and biotite patino douce..
one may therefore speculate that the yg magmas were generated at greater depths than the ns magmas resulting in higher amount of residual garnet..
started with the intrusion of dioritic magmas that were derived from an enriched lithospheric mantle..
subsequently several crust derived magma pulses formed southern granodioritic and northern granitic complex..
aside from mafic microganular enclaves of dioritic to tonalitic composition both complexes show little internal compositional variation..
microstructures of enclaves and surrounding host rocks indicate the coexistence of mantle derived dioritic and crust derived felsic magmas..
chemical and isotopic characteristics of the point to metaigneous metabasitic to metatonalitic crustal source whereas the granitic magmas were most probably derived by dehydration melting of metagreywackes..
substantial contribution of metapelitic to the and granites can be material ruled out..
abundances and variations of ree and in and granites favour amphibole and plagioclase but rule out garnet as major fractionating phases during magma segregation..
trace element characteristics of the og are consistent with but do not require magma generation in volcanic arc setting above subducting slab..
the yg of natzwiller and senones most probably originated by dehydration melting of metasedimentary sources at greater depths since their trace element characteristics suggest higher amounts of garnet and amphibole as fractionating phases..
granite of baden baden northern schwarzwald shows similar characteristics..
whereas all the older type granitoids diorites..
form elongated wsw ene granites trending complexes the younger granitic plutons show round shapes suggesting change in the crustal stress field..
intrusion depths as deduced from inhornblende barometry tend to decrease in the order of decreasing intrusion age from about km..
diorite to about km yg..
conclusions in the northern vosges early carboniferous postaccretionary high calc alkaline plutonic activity this study is contribution to the german national research project orogenic processes with particular reference to the variscides..
financial support by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft lithos..
technical support was provided by charly wacker and..
thank gerhard eisbacher and for discussions as well as..
and an anonymous reviewer for constructive criticisms of an earlier version of the manuscript..
references ahrendt clauer hunzikerc weber..
migration of folding and metamorphism in the rheinisches schiefergebirge deduced from ar and age determinations..
martin ederw eds intracontinental fold belts..
ahrendt franzkej marheine schwab wemmer..
zum alter der metamorphose in der wippraer zonerharz ergebnisse von krar altersdatierungen an..
local equilibrium of mafic enclaves and granitoids of the turtle pluton southeastern mineral chemical and isotopic evidence..
early miocene post collisional calc alkaline magmatism along the easternmost segment of the periadriatic fault system slovenia and croatia..
plutonism in the variscan odenwald germany from subduction to collision..
terranes in the circumatlantic paleozoic orogens igcp field rhenohercynian belt and mid german crystalline rise..
paleomagnetic constraints on the paleogeograpic evolution of europe during the paleozoic..
franke weber eds pre permian geology of central and eastern europe berlin pp..
tracer versus trace element diffusional decoupling of concentration from isotope composition..
instrumental neutron activation analysis by collecting only one results for international geochemical reference samples..
underplating and partial implications for melt generation and extraction..
petrogenesis of hercynian leucogranites from the southern armorican contribution of ree and isotopic nd pb and geochemical data to the study of source rock characteristics and ages..
du metamorphisme et du magmatisme des vosges..
comparaison avec les massifs varisques avoisinants..
boyntonv cosmochemistry of the rare earth meteorite studies..
henderson ed rare earth element geochemistry..
evolution of orogenic belts and the causes of regional metamorphism..
petrogenesis of pliocene to quaternary alkali basalts from the huri hills northern kenya..
datations rubidium strontium dans les schistes de steige et la serie de ville vosges..
les et du neugrunrain pres du hohwald vosges et leurs enclaves..
et tendances geochimiques des bandes granodioritiques et granitiques formant le massif du champ du feu vosges cristallines du nord..
trace element and isotopic effects of combined wall rock assimilation and fractional crystallization..
the various types of enclaves in the hercynian granitoids of the massif central france..
didier eds enclaves and granite petrology..
chitiniozoaires ordoviciens et siluriens des schistes de steige dans les vosges..
variscan crustal evolution in the vosges moutains and in the guide to the excursion of the swiss geological society and the swiss society of mineralogy and petrology october..
paleomagnetic investigations and ar dating on the variscan plutonic massif of the champ du feu and its volcanic sedimentary environment northern vosges france..
crustal scale thrusting and extension in the hercynian schwarzwald and vosges central europe..
evidence of isotopic equilibration between microgranitoid enclaves and host granodiorite lachlan fold belt australia..
age of some granitic rocks in the vosges the schwarzwald and the massif central..
variscan granitoids of central their typology potential sources and tectonothermal relations..
metamorphisme et magmatisme dans les vosges moyennes alsace..
lithos pre permian geology of central and eastern europe berlin pp..
the generation of granitic magmas by intrusion of basalt into continental crust..
nd isotopic constraints on the petrogenesis of the central bohemian pluton czech republic..
kalt hanel schleicher kramm petrology and geochronology of from the variscan schwarzwaldg..
oblique crustal detachment in the variscan schwarzwald southwestern germany..
kinetics of and nd exchange in silicate theory experiments and applications to uphill diffusion isotopic equilibration and irreversible mixing of magmas..
aspects chimiques des interactions entre les magmas basiques et leur encaissant pelitique dans le pluton isme..
franke weber eds pre permian geology of central and eastern europe berlin pp..
biostratigraphische datierung des nordsch warzwalder moderner rontgenuntersuchungen vortrag..
metavolcanic rocks in the northern phyllite zone at the southern margin of the rhenohercynian belt..
igcp terranes in the circum atlantic paleozoic orogens field rhenohercynian belt and mid german crystalline rise..
isotopic disequilibrium among commingled hybrid evidence for two stage magma mixing commingling process in the mt arizona..
geochemistry of metasediments in the hercynian and pre hercynian crust of the schwarzwald the vosges and northern switzerland..
transformation of magmatic arc and an orogenic root during oblique collision and it consequences for the evolution of the european variscides mid german crystalline rise..
effects of pressure ando content on the composition of primary crustal melts..
dehydration melting of iotite gneiss and quartz amphibolite from to kbar..
geotraverse de la cha ne varisque des vosges france..
synthese des travaux effectues depuis deux decennies..
sci paris ser ii franke..
franke weber eds pre permian geology of central and eastern europe..
franke weber eds pre permian geology of central and eastern europe berlin pp..
nd isotopic record of ulti stage interactions between mantle derived magmas and crustal components in collision context the ultramafic granitoid association from vivero hercynian belt nw spain..
detrital glaucophane in graywackes of the rhenohercynian harz mountains and the geodynamic implications..
simultaneous determination of thirty seven trace elements in twenty eight international rocks standards by..
experimental melting of muscovite assemblages and implications for crustal melting..
compilation report on trace elements in six anrt rock reference diorite dr serpentine ub bauxite bx disthene dt graniteand potash feldspar..
zur genese des kagenfels granits..
nd pb ar and isotope systematics of sturgeon lake kimberlite saskatchewan constraints on emplacement age alteration and source composition..
the age of the kagen..
fels granite northern vosges and its bearing on the intrusion scheme of late variscan granitoids..
crustal contributions to arc magmatism in the andes of central chile..
the oxygen isotope composition of hercynian granites and pre hercynian gneisses from the schwarzwald germany..
chemical and isotopic evidence for major mass transfer between mafic enclaves and felsic magma..
magma pulses in the central variscan episodic melt generation and emplacement during lithospheric thinning..
amphibole composition in tonalite as function of an experimental calibration of the inhornblende barometer..
dehydration melting of part ii..
composition of melts and solids..
and mgrfe ratio on dehydration melting of model metagreywackes..
melting of crustal ocks during continental collision and subduction..
hacker lioug eds when continents geodynamics and geochemistry of ultrahigh pressure rocks..
petrology and structural geology vol..
kluwer academic publishers dordrecht pp..
source and setting of granitic rocks..
to each plutonic rock its proper name..
geochemistry of eocene calcalkaline volcanic rocks from the kastamonu area northern turkey..
melt infiltration and advection in microdioritic enclaves..
origin of microgranular enclaves in equivocal nd evidence from hercynian rocks in the massif central france..
trace element and isotopic exchange during acid basic magma interaction processes..
amphibole out phase boundary in partially melted metabasalt its control over liquid fraction and composition and source permeability..
dehydration melting of metabasalt at implications for continental growth and crust mantle recycling..
la ce eu yb and lu content of fifteen french geochemical reference samples determined by neutron activation analysis..
late cambrian to early from the ville unit northern vosges mountains france..
le volcanisme tholeitique du massif de schirmeck vosges septentrionales france temoin une zone de convergence de plaques au superieur..
origin of high potassium calc alkaline type granitoids..
late caledonian dyke swarms in southern regional zone of primitive rich lamprophyres and associated vents..
the influence of amphibole fractionation on the evolution of calc alkaline andesite and dacite tehpra from the central aleutians alaska..
special lamprophyre derived mafic enclaves in some hercynian granites from western and central europe..
didier eds enclaves and granite petrology..
geodynamic evolution of the european variscan fold palaeomagnetic and geological constraints..
fertility of crustal rocks during anatexis..
melting of the continental some thermal and petrological constraints on anatexis in continental collision zones and other tectonic settings..
geochemische untersuchungen bestand und ni cu zn zr nb und ba in den..
geochemical comparison between minettes and kersantites from the western european hercynian trace element and pb nd isotope constraints on their origin..
experimental interaction of granitic and basaltic magmas and implications for mafic enclaves..
determination of thirteen rare earth elements by high performance liquid chromatography in thirty and of cs and ba by isotope dilution mass spectrometry in eighteen international geochemical reference samples..
vermap besch guevara schulz dobrick..
determination of twelve trace elements in twenty seven and ten major elements in twenty three geochemical reference samples by ray fluorescence spectrometry..
crystallization and hybridism in microgranitoid enclave microstructural evidence..
von blanckenburg kagami deutsch wiedenbeck fischer..
the origin of alpine plutons along the periadriatic lineament..
dioritisation et metamorphisme dans les vosges cristallines du region comprise entre la plaine alsace saint nabor et le champ du feu..
dioritisation et metamorphisme dans les vosges cristallines du ii..
la region comprise entre la faille vosgienne est de grendelbruch et lithos..
la vallee de la bruche la hauteur de fouday rothau..
this book is not intended as gentle introduction to the field of mantle convection but is for readers who either know what they want to learn or are motivated..
it is therefore not targeted as an undergraduate textbook..
it is though must for the library of any research establishment whose research is impinged upon by mantle convection..
would also recommend it for the personal shelves of research workers in mantle convection..
the book has historical plate structure and composition of the mantle temperatures and thermodynamic viscosity of the basic linear approximate calculation of convection in two numerical models of three dimensional hot spots and mantle chemical thermal history of the convection in the interiors of solid planets and nature of convection in the mantle..
as you can see it is comprehensive..
the book is well illustrated with many graphs diagrams and figures..
where the original figures are in colour they are in black and white in the text but then colour version can be found in sections with colour plates..
the book by and large has been well edited with very few errors until the last few chapters where they become more common though all the errors noticed were trivial and obvious..
the book is broad in scope bringing in such aspects as the constraints of seismic topography and mantle convection in other planetary bodies..
the book has questions sprinkled these are numbered and set aside from the flow of the text..
the final chapter is review which largely comments on the questions..
this chapter would be of interest to the researcher wanting to get feel for the frontiers of the field and its successes..
this is an exciting field and the future challenge for truly comprehensive theory of mantle convection is obvious given the significant differences it must explain between the planetary bodies..
this book will be the foundation for many workers as they broach the challenge ahead..
mag the miocene monterey formation of california is one of the world classic petroleum source rocks..
because it represents an unusually clear ancient example of deposition within the oxygen minimum zone omz of an upwellinginfluenced continental margin it has also become one of the main compass points used by organic geochemists in their characterization of marine sediments..
it is this perspective that dominates the there is considerably more of the molecules than the rocks good news for organic geochemists perhaps little disappointing for the rest of us..
only five of the main chapters are geological while ten deal with molecular organic geochemistry..
four chapters focus on monterey derived oils four deal with maturation related geochemistry and two with isotopic chemistry..
there is only one chapter on inorganic trace and major element geochemistry..
the introductory chapter by provides an excellent overview and deserves to be widely read though it contains no major surprises for anyone familiar with her earlier works..
she has long argued that lower diatom silica dilution results in the highest organic contents occurring in the most slowly deposited intervals deposited when productivity was lowest..
her conclusion that dissolved oxygen had little effect on the organic content is primarily because it hardly varied suboxic at the low sedimentation rates observed the formation would not have been as organic rich had fully oxic conditions prevailed..
also argues that the modern californian continental borderland intra omz basins are actually poor modern analogue for monterey deposition which was deposited much more widely in less steep basins with topography related upwelling that generally resulted only in moderate palaeoproductivity..
the indisputable strength of this volume is the diversity of..
analytical data and supporting information it contains..
it is based on the cooperative monterey organic geochemical study cmogs which ran from to distributing well characterized replicated samples around laboratories..
most of the chapters use only the original cmogs rock samples chosen from two outcrops one immature and one mature and cmogs oils nine from onshore fields and two offshore..
for the immature naples beach section this usually equates to only nine samples from the thick monterey formation..
deliberate sampling of the lithological variants presumably explains why the data suggest greater geochemical heterogeneity than was often previously inferred..
the great duplication of analytical effort during cmogs has permitted an interesting inter laboratory statistical comparison of whole rock molecular and extract parameters..
to judge from the references cited this volume has had rather long gestation period..
there are only post citations included..
the volume is well produced but the cover of the paperback edition is rather flimsy and am not optimistic that it or the binding will stand up well to handling..
anyone interested in the monterey formation of course but also those interested in the organic geochemistry of ancient or modern omz and upwelling related sediments..
the paperback price is reasonable for specialist volume and no great deterrent to personal ownership..
the libraries of all institutions engaged in marine organic geochemical research should also purchase copy..
tectonics of the nanga parbat syntaxis and the western himalaya..
geological society special publication no..
pp london geological society of london..
price us members price us gsa price us hard covers..
mag the himalaya is widely considered as the best suited natural setting to investigate orogenic processes during an on going continental collision..
yet although our understanding of the himalayan orogen has greatly improved during the past few decades numerous key areas remain poorly known mainly because of rugged topography and restricted access to sensitive border regions..
new book reporting on the geology of such areas is therefore bound to raise interest especially if it claims to address one of the most exciting frontiers for continental tectonic studies..
tectonics of the nanga parbat syntaxis and the western himalaya is collection of research papers arising from the thirteenth himalaya karakoram tibet workshop held in at the university of peshawar in pakistan..
these contributions deal with various aspects of the himalayan tectonic evolution in northern pakistan and adjoining areas of india..
this region characterized by extreme topographic gradients reaching above provides unique opportunity to investigate complete transects across the deformed margins of the indian and asian plates as well as across the exceptional kohistan island arc caught in between..
this region also represents the western limit of the himalayan range where the remarkable arc parallel structural continuity observed for more than km along the belt abruptly terminates at the level of sharp orogenic bend..
in the core of the antiformal half window formed by this nanga parbat syntaxis crystalline rocks of the indian plate are tectonically exhumed from beneath the kohistan island arc sequence that has been previously overthrusted onto the indian margin along the main mantle thrust..
recent geological investigations revealed that the rocks of the nanga parbat massif record some of the highest uplift exhumation and erosion rates measured on earth..
the nanga parbat syntaxis appears therefore as key area to decipher the interactions between tectonic and superficial processes during exhumation of deep crustal rocks and it is not surprising that such spectacularly active orogenic context is attracting an increasing number of geoscientists..
tectonics of the nanga parbat syntaxis and the western himalaya is not intended as thorough geological synthesis and the relevant results of previous investigations in these regions are only briefly summarized in the introductory chapter..
the wide range of topics covered by the papers gathered in this volume provide however fairly extensive overview of the present day state of knowledge of this complex orogenic setting..
large part of these contributions is focused on the tectonic and metamorphic history of the indian plate and kohistan arc units of northern pakistan..
these studies yield rich supply of new constraints particularly about the structural evolution of the nanga parbat syntaxis and main mantle thrust the pressure temperature time evolution of the polymetamorphic eclogite bearing crystalline rocks of the indian plate and the unexpected correlation of these latter rocks with the lesser himalayan units exposed father to the southeast..
these results are complemented by an extensive survey of the gravity field of the karakoram range and surrounding areas field based and remote sensing quantitative assessments of the vigorous unroofing and erosion dynamics in the nanga parbat massif and thought provoking numerical modelling suggesting that the himalayan syntaxes could reflect buckling at the scale of the lithosphere..
additional papers address notably the crustal shortening accommodated across the indian continental margin and the protracted tectono stratigraphic history recorded in the ophiolitic mélanges of the indus suture zone in the himalaya of northwest india..
of particular interest are two reports on the still poorly documented geology of the asian plate units exposed in the karakoram and ranges of the northernmost part of pakistan..
these contributions provide much sought after information about the mesozoic accretion of the karakoram terrane and kohistan arc along the southern asian margin as well as about the tectonic evolution of this margin during its tertiary collision with the indenting indian plate..
some years ago renowned himalayan geologist remarked that the facts versus theories ratio in the himalayan geological literature tends to decrease..
it is consequently worth emphasizing that this book is chiefly about geological facts as exemplified by several original geological maps contributing to complete the survey of regions that were largely unknown until few decades ago..
most of the papers give account of field based studies and they collectively present an impressive set of new structural geochemical geochronological petrological stratigraphic geomorphological and geophysical data..
these results are richly illustrated by clear graphics and pictures the carefully edited text contains few errors and the overall presentation is representative of the high quality standards of this series of publications..
like the previous geological society special publication no dedi..
cated to himalayan tectonics the present volume represents major contribution to our understanding of the tectonothermal evolution during the india asia continental collision as well as the pre tertiary geodynamic history of the various terranes involved in the himalayan orogen..
it is not however comprehensive textbook on himalayan geology and readers not necessarily familiar with the subject may regret the lack of more detailed introduction to the broader himalayan geological context..
moreover the sum of new information contained in this book would surely have benefited from concluding synthesis providing critical assessment of the progress made and highlighting the remaining unresolved issues..
in any case the present volume is an essential reference for future himalayan research and it illustrates that there still are indeed exciting frontier areas for geologists to explore..
highly recommend it to all those interested in the geology of the himalaya in particular and in continental tectonics in general..
minimum pc mb ram hicolor svga graphic adapter mb free space on hard disk ms windows double speed cd rom drive mouse..
recommended pentium pc or faster mb ram or more true color xvga graphic adapter mb free space on hard disk windows or fast cd rom drive mouse..
the cd rom can be used on macintosh computers if pc simulator and windows are installed..
berlin heidelberg new york london paris tokyo hong springer verlag price dm ös sfr us..
mag this cd rom is basically an interactive and enhanced version of the materials from the textbook by the same authors..
the cd rom basically follows the same structure as the page book and is split into eleven chapters with appendices of videos and photos..
installation is relatively straightforward installed it on windows and windows without problem but users of newer operating systems will be bemused by the request to install intel indeo video drivers these came out with windows..
the installation software does not seem to be aware of windows media player..
the indeo video drivers work without problem however..
accessing the cd rom materials is achieved via the navigator and text links on the opening splash screen..
these are negotiated using something that resembles the old windows help interface which takes little bit of getting used to if you are expecting web browser one with panes would suit the format best..
within the text references figures and key topics are hyperlinked and links are also provided to other relevant chapters..
glossary is provided which includes underlined words in the text although these are not hyperlinked..
the subject matter is comprehensive and working through the cd rom will give you good grounding in recent developments in microstructural geology..
strongly technical approach is balanced by many real world examples with illustrative materials that are lavish and clear..
the cd rom can be worked through systematically or individual topics can be accessed at random via the navigator..
chapter presents framework of microtectonic studies and is followed by chapters that introduce the principles of deformation deformation mechanisms foliations shear zones dilatation porphyroclasts microgauges and special techniques such as cathodoluminescence electron microscopy lattice preferred orientation analysis and modelling..
the cd rom finishes with chapter on the steps involved in going from hand sample to thin section and the main text is followed by chapter of useful and instructive problem thinsection examples..
it is hard to do justice to the breadth of material covered with brief review like this but found the chapters on porphyroblasts and shear zones particularly comprehensive..
the focus is more qualitative than quantitative which may not satisfy everybody although there is large bibliography allowing specific topic to be followed up in more detail..
overall the colour figures simple animations and videos give the cd rom version of huge advantage over the static monochrome illustrations of the printed version and can highly recommend it to anyone seeking good undergraduate text covering the nature of microstructural analysis with abundant examples or seeking to update their general microstructural knowledge..
tektites in the geological showers of glass from the sky..
london geological society of london..
mag outside of scientific journals there are few complete accounts of tektites in the modern literature..
four previous compilations two academic barnes and barnes benchmark papers in geology dowden hutchinson and and keefe tektites and their origin elsevier new york both now outdated and two popular have so far served researchers students and the wider public..
this new work by mccall brings the subject into the century by providing an extensive and detailed academic review of tektites their nature occurrence and origin..
the elucidation of the origin of tektites as the distal terrestrial glass ejecta from meteorite impact events in the geological past is one of the great scientific detective detective stories of the last century..
however mccall does not treat the subject from this rather he provides solid detailed information on their form composition geological occurrence and interpretation..
many aspects of the formation of tektites remain to be solved not least of which is the identification of the elusive source of the australasian tektite and microtektite strewn field..
the author rightly does not view this as an easy prospect..
the book comprises nine chapters and an appendix dealing with all aspects of the study of tektites from historical geological morphological and analytical perspectives..
chapter one deals with the history of the recognition of tektites early discussions of their origin and the crucial link with the emergence of the study of impact craters on earth as an important geological process..
chapter two is catalogue of information discovery distribution physical characteristics composition age and numbers for each of the four known australasian central european north american and ivory coast tektite strewn fields..
chapter three is devoted to microtektites strewn field specific their relationship to the larger tektites with which they are associated and their important role in defining tektite strewn fields..
chapter four concentrates on the muong nong tektites large bodies of layered glass thought to lie close to the source of the australasian tektite strewn field..
there is also discussion of layered muong nong like glasses from other strewn fields and the importance of these partially homogenized tektites in understanding the original target materials from which they were produced..
chapter five explores the suggested but now discounted age paradox between the stratigraphic occurrence of some tektites notably australites and their radiometric ages..
chapter six covers the sources of tektites emphasizing their terrestrial origin and provides the evidence linking the tektite strewn fields to particular impact structures..
in chapters seven and eight there is departure from the main tektite theme to discuss occurrences of other natural glasses in relation to impacts such as libyan desert glass in egypt in tasmania and glasses associated with the zhamanshin crater in kazakhstan..
the discussion is extended to cover tektite like glass from the boundary in haiti and more enigmatic glass occurrences such as microtektite like spherules in upper devonian rocks of belgium and and spherules microcrystites from the archaean of western australia and south africa..
surprisingly the urengoite tektites and other recent discoveries of tektite like glass in russia with much better tektite credentials low water content are overlooked..
nevertheless these two chapters serve to make the important distinction between proximal impact glass impactites and distal tektites and microtektites glass ejecta..
in chapter nine mccall brings the evidence together in discussion of the origin of tektites..
here and in other parts of the book the author occasionally lends unnecessary credence to outlandish and scientifically unsupported explanations of tektites that have long since been discredited..
but suspect that the author is sometimes playing devil advocate by taking an opposing view..
however the author always returns to the orthodox view of the origin of tektites that is strongly supported by evidence eventually overcoming any prejudices that the reader may harbour..
overall there is slight bias towards the australasian tektite strewn field..
this is forgivable since it is the largest yet described and one in which many additional questions remain to be answered..
this includes better understanding of the special circumstances and physics of tektite generating impacts producing abundant glass and launching it as tektites to considerable distances from the source crater..
the book is well illustrated and like every good review contains rich and useful compilations of data gleaned from wide range of publications many of which are either difficult to obtain or no longer generally available..
this aspect of the book combined with its extensive reference list is its real strength..
many researchers will find it useful addition to their libraries as an easy reference source for many aspects of tektite research..
the book is also good introduction for students entering the subject for the first time but the level of presentation may be beyond the wider public..
the glossary and an appendix on isotopic studies will however aid many readers without geological background..
one matter of real concern is the price tag..
an enquiry with my local australian distributors gave current retail price for the book of tax..
this is an inordinate amount of money for soft covered publication of this size lacking colour illustrations and it will undoubtedly affect its distribution..
will certainly treasure my review..
ophiolites and oceanic new insights from field studies and the ocean drilling program..
proceedings of the penrose conference held in marshall california september..
geological society of america special paper no..
price us members us non members paperback..
mag thirty years ago at the first penrose conference on ophiolites in ophiolite complexes were first compared to sections of the oceanic crust and upper mantle..
it is astonishing to think of the progress made since then..
particularly impressive is the interaction between field structural geologists and igneous petrologists studying ophiolites in the field with marine geologists and geophysicists..
the recent deep drilling of the lower oceanic crust and upper mantle at the hess deep the mid atlantic ridge and the southwest indian ridge has allowed much closer comparison to the plutonic complexes of ophiolites..
ocean drilling however will never allow the very detailed three dimensional view of the oceanic crust and upper mantle provided by on land ophiolites..
it is only in these well exposed and complete ophiolites such as the oman where some tectonic processes will be deduced..
detailed mapping of mantle fabrics makes it possible to determine palaeo mantle flow patterns mantle melting processes and melt pathways up into the lower crust..
detailed mapping of the and sheeted dyke complex can be used to determine the shape and size of magma chambers and how melts are channelled to the volcanic edifice above..
detailed sampling and structural analysis of the high temperature metamorphic sole combined with thermobarometry and microstructural studies can resolve the obduction history..
this book is collection of papers resulting from the penrose conference convened in september in marshall california..
the book covers just about all aspects of ophiolite petrogenesis and includes field related studies and results from the ocean drilling program..
it is divided into six sections..
the first section covers the ophiolite oceanic lithosphere analogue the second section covers the oceanic lower crust and upper mantle the third section the structure and physical properties of the upper oceanic crust and the fourth section covers hydrothermal processes..
the final two sections cover regional ophiolites from around the world..
the two most important ophiolite conundrums are their tectonic setting origins and their emplacement mechanisms..
the conflict between mid ocean ridge setting suprasubduction zone setting fore arc immature island arc or back arc or transform fault environment still goes on as does the conflict between detachment at the ridge axis and subduction zone processes during obduction..
geochemistry and isotopic composition of lavas sheeted dykes and have classically been used to interpret tectonic settings..
however it is becoming increasingly more obvious that the metamorphic sole and even the sedimentary and volcanic rocks in the thrust sheets immediately beneath the ophiolite hold the key to resolving tectonic setting..
detailed geochronology of most metamorphic soles and ophiolite complexes has yet to be conducted..
because of the very limited sampling of the lower oceanic crust from drilling inferences about processes at the base of the crust and magma chamber models have largely relied on the study of ophiolites..
complexity shown in ophiolites makes one realise just how much can be missing from single..
the astonishing structures of the layered cumulate series above the moho the shape of gabbroic magma chambers tracing magma pathways from up through the sheeted dykes to pillow lavas revealed from gentle stroll up any one of the numerous wadis in the oman mountains which cut through the ophiolite really brings home the fact that the answer ultimately lies in the..
recent detailed geophysical petrological and geological investigations of active spreading centres has enabled more accurate observation and sampling of lava flows and hydrothermal systems..
these new data have resulted in models which incorporate melt production migration and injection with observations including seismic data bathymetry and gravity..
ongoing geophysical studies in the oceans such as the mantle electromagnetic and tomography experiment will provide crucial new data for interpreting the deep structure of the mantle..
this book contains wealth of new data and new thinking on the whole problem of ophiolites and oceanic crust and upper mantle..
it is crucial reading for anyone involved in ophiolite research and indeed for anyone interested in processes operating in the oceans which cover two thirds of our planet..
the rocks of planet earth..
cambridge new york cambridge university press..
mag it is always slightly shocking to discover just how little even the brightest young recruits to university science courses know about the most common earth materials rocks and their most abundant mineral components the silicate minerals..
in beneath our feet aims to overcome this problem by providing an accessible and well illustrated introduction to the rocks of planet earth as he subtitles his book..
is well known australian geologist specializing in metamorphic rocks author of classic textbook metamorphic processes and an editor for the journal of metamorphic geology so he knows his stuff..
his pitch is fairly basic and so mainly directed at introductory geology courses and perhaps more general readership..
after brief introduction to plate tectonics the structure and composition of the earth the book is divided into thematic chapters from the evidence for flow in rocks through mantle derived materials igneous rocks and an alltoo brief section on sedimentary rocks metamorphic rocks to meteorites..
has had the good idea of portraying rocks at all scales from the field context through the hand specimen to the thin section although do wonder just how much the untutored eye will be able to read from the thin sections without some direction..
in my experience it can take some explaining for students to be able see what is actually before their eyes otherwise they just seem to see pretty patterns of polarization colours that might just as well be hangovers from the days of acid rock lp covers or some of the linoleum patterns that used to be in fashion but are probably collectors items now..
however with some colour photographs this book should certainly be pointed out to first year students and available in departmental libraries..
there is an accompanying glossary index and disappointingly brief recommended reading list and no mention of relevant websites which surely are de rigueur these days..
my only other gripe is that the colour values of many of the photos are slightly odd with pervasive and curious pink grey hue but suspect that will only be noticeable to the experienced eye..
angiosperm woods from british lower cretaceous and palaeogene deposits..
special papers in palaeontology no..
mag this is highly specialized book really an extended scientific paper whose pages are almost entirely devoted to very detailed quantitative description of large collection of fossil angiosperm woods from britain..
the title is slightly misleading in that only one specimen is given cretaceous age and even this assignment seems highly the wood fragment was collected as an erratic one hundred years ago no locality details were recorded and certain advanced anatomical features may imply tertiary..
in general the specimens described in this volume are well illustrated and the text is well organized but frustratingly there is little attempt made to discuss this potentially interesting material in its broader and more exciting palaeoenvironmental contree rings in the woods are briefly text..
for example analysed but their significance is not fully synthesized with earlier studies of global and regional palaeoclimate and palaeogeography..
maps giving the palaeoenvironmental setting would have been invaluable here..
similarly aspects of wood anatomy are variously described as being primitive or advanced yet the reader is never introduced to the interesting story of the functional evolution of angiosperm wood anatomy..
introduction knowledge of the distribution of radiogenic heat production as function of depth in the earth is critical for the determination of crustal thermal and rheological structure and provides an important constraint on geochemical petrological and tectonic models of crustal evolution..
however variation of heat production with depth has rarely been empirically constrained..
instead heat production is typically assumed to decrease exponentially with depth and the exponential is scaled to be consistent with surface heat flow data..
the exponential distribution model for radiogenic heat production has seen widespread use and acceptance since it was first proposed by but represents at best gross simplification of the actual heat production profile in any particular geologic setting..
the exponential distribution model is based on the observation that co located heat flow and near surface heat production determinations within particular heat flow province commonly fall on or near line defined by the..
where is the surface heat flow qr is the reduced heat flow value is the slope of the best fit line through the data and is the near surface radiogenic heat production..
the value of is interpreted to represent the depth scale of variation of heat production and qr the background heat flux generally assumed to be the mantle contribution to total heat flux..
this linear relationship could be explained by model in which radiogenic heat production is constant from surface to depth and then decreases to regionally uniform value such that integrated heat production below that point is qr..
this may be reasonable in so far as sheet like plutons of near constant thickness apparently are found at or near the surface in some cases but is probably not widely applicable because such model requires very fortuitous history of magma emplacement and erosion to create layer of plutons with laterally variable heat production but constant thickness over large area..
proposed an exponential distribution model þ..
where heat production varies as function of depth this relationship is arguably more realistic in so far as it would produce the linear relationship of vs in spite of spatially variable erosion..
noted that the exponential relationship had not been independently confirmed by depth vs heat production studies and his discussion infers that the model may apply only to systematically differentiated granitoid crust..
while an exponential decrease of heat producing elements with depth provides an elegant mathematical alternative to the generation of empirical depth vs heat production profiles the model is not validated by direct measurements of the distribution of radiogenic heat production in the crust..
radiogenic heat production often changes in discontinuous or stepwise pattern as lithology changes downward..
in studies where upper crustal lithologies are included heat production tends to first increase with depth then decrease with depth..
in cases where radiogenic heat production is seen to decrease downward errors in heat production or depth determinations have been too large to test the exponential model..
one study of depth vs heat production within single pluton from the sierra nevada california was permissive of either linear or an exponential depth distribution of heat production but with depth scale of only km sawka and which is inconsistent with km for the sierra nevada as whole..
in addition to lack of empirical evidence for an exponential depth distribution of heat producing elements modeling of realistic crustal structures has shown that it is possible to generate linear heat production vs heat flow relationship from crust that has generally downward..
lithos decreasing but laterally highly variable hpe abundance..
if the exponential distribution model is correct anywhere it is perhaps within large continental arcs or batholiths where numerous magmatic bodies have long histories of melting differentiation and migration that could conceivably produce systematic upward increase in incompatible hpe abundance..
for example data from the closepet batholith in the dharwar craton of southern india does show roughly exponential distribution of radiogenic heat production over paleodepth range of km..
however even in the end member case of crustal section that has undergone progressive fractionation upwards there is no priori reason for the heat producing element concentrations to decrease exponentially with depth..
given the overall inability of the exponential distribution model for radiogenic heat production to the results of most published accurately represent empirical studies it would be preferable to replace it with set of empirically constrained models that define the probable patterns of crustal heat production ideally one for each heat flow province or at least one for each type and age of crust..
this has previously been untenable simply due to the great effort involved in acquiring sufficient number of heat production measurements and the lack of deep drill holes or exhumed crustal sections with sufficient paleodepth control..
however modern mass spectrometry combined with an increased number of well understood tectonically exposed crustal sections and an increased such selection of efforts more feasible..
reliable geobarometers makes in this study compiled published th and concentration and data on rocks from the california arc sierra nevada and related terranes in california in order to determine the heat production profile of the arc crust..
added new heat production analyses from the southern sierra nevada and estimated the distribution of radiogenic heat production as function of depth in the mesozoic arc..
show heat production generally decreases with depth but not exponentially the heat producing elements are most abundant at paleo depths of km where hydrothermal alteration is most pronounced and limited amounts of fluid saturated re melting of granitoids and silicic volcanics may have occurred and the thickness of the felsic batholith km in california is significantly greater than predicted from modeling of heat flow data..
geology of the sierra nevada the sierra nevada batholith is an overall northward plunging exposure of the upper km thick felsic intermediate crust of the jurassic to cretaceous continental arc ague and saleeby and saleeby..
rocks exposed in the northern and central sierra nevada crystallized at depths of km ague and include eruptive equivalents of the underlying intrusive rocks fiske and tobisch while those from the southernmost sierra nevada crystallized at km and saleeby ague..
low seismic velocities in the sierran crust support the assumption that exhumed felsic to intermediate rocks in the southern sierra nevada batholith are representative of unexhumed arc rocks to the north..
xenolith populations from miocene volcanics in the central sierra nevada are consistent with this interpretation as they include felsic arc related these volcanics plumb the upper mantle but no good barometric indicators have been found for the felsic samples so it is not clear what depth they came from..
in addition to the main body of the sierra nevada batholith tectonically offset block of sierran rocks crops out in the santa lucia mts..
the sierran affinity rocks in the santa lucia mts include tonalites diorites and metasediments..
these rocks were exhumed from depths of km..
deeper portions of the sierran arc lithosphere are sampled by small volumes of mafic to intermediate volcanics that erupted through the sierra nevada and carried xenoliths from depths of to km..
nevada border ca location of figure peninsular ranges batholith..
oa garlock fault tehachapi mts..
minarets complex samples ae franciscan rocks..
santa lucia mountains cia ts..
map showing numbered sample localities for new data points and general sample areas for previously published data within the main outcrop mass of the sierra nevada batholith and the tectonically offset equivalent in the santa lucia mts occurred in two distinct intervals one in the midmiocene and the other in the plio each set shows different sub sierran mantle lithosphere composition..
the older volcanics include xenoliths that suggest the sierra nevada batholith was underlain by an eclogitic root the garnet and pyroxene rich pressure mpa latitude depth of emplacement km..
latitude versus depth of emplacement determined with aluminum in hornblende barometry for plutonic rocks of the sierra nevada batholith new determinations plus data ague and ague ague pers..
note that the data reflect an overall northward plunge of the batholith with the southern km plunging most steeply trendline is best fit order polynomial..
the significant scatter of data at any given latitude is largely due to east west variations in exhumation across the km wide batholith..
lithos step dissolution of to mg aliquots in hot concentrated nitric hydrofluoric and boric acids..
analytical precision for these elements with the icpms best fit km preferred model curve moho km..
paleodepth vs radiogenic heat production plot for the sierra nevada batholith..
data from published literature shown in grey see for details new data shown in black..
circles represent metasediments all data from igneous and meta igneous rocks shown as squares..
depth error bars represent average kb errors for variety of barometric determinations except for the samples from the minarets caldera complex..
the bar from to km depth represents samples from the minarets caldera ignimbrite and is plotted over depth range equal to the measured stratigraphic thickness of the ignimbrite..
samples plotted at km depth come from variety of plutons in the minarets and merced peak area and are plotted at this depth because in situ melts fall between the kb and cotectics of the quartz albite orthoclase system..
the error bars on heat productivity determinations are smaller than the symbols..
moho depth is plotted at km consistent with the crustal structure suggested by xenolith studies and saleeby and geophysical data..
residue of the batholith from to km and mantle wedge peridotites to km..
in contrast the younger volcanics include no eclogitic instead mantle peridotites begin immediately beneath the felsic crust from depths of km downward..
this change in composition has been interpreted as being caused by foundering of the batholith root and replacement by upper mantle material..
because are interested in constructing depth vs heat production profile for the jurassic cretaceous will only consider data from the older xenolith sample suite..
samples and techniques the depth vs heat production model was constructed using and th and concentration data from sample locations within the california arc..
for of these locations data were obtained from published geochemical and stratigraphic studies..
the largest remaining data gaps as function of depth were filled with new analytical data from locations..
for most locations paleo depth determinations and corresponding geochemical measurements were made on samples collected from the same outcrop..
however for two samples from the sierra nevada mts as well as the samples from the tehachapi and santa lucia mts and geochemical determinations were not co rather paleo depth values were calculated by linear interpolation between nearby determinations..
in all cases paleodepths represent late cretaceous sample depths as all sampled lithologies were emplaced or deposited during that time interval..
for the newly analyzed samples hpe abundances were determined by measuring concentrations of and in dissolved samples of whole rock using quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry icpms at the university of victoria and california state university bakersfield..
this involved crushing and powdering of of rock down to grain size of am followed by multisourced dc km gpa ppm ppm..
th total sample lithologya tc cm gc tc tc tc tc gc gc..
lithos radiogenic element abundances and depth control data for samples of the sierra nevada batholith..
lithos sourced dc km gpa ppm ppm..
th total continued sample lithologya..
gc gc gc gc gc gc tc tc..
rpli nclj slgk mpml ppmeo rmvp radiogenic heat production is calculated by assuming total total total th th and elemental heat production kg for th kg for and kg for th..
eclogite granulite intrusive igneous metasediment peridotite volcanic..
densities were not measured for each sample instead reasonable average values were assigned for each lithology..
assigned densities for for the minarets caldera ignimbrite..
all pressure to depth conversions assume constant density of..
value interpolated from data in and saleeby and ague and value newly acquired value from ague and value and geochemical data from value and geochemical data from value from and saleeby samples collected through the entire km thickness of the minarets caldera ignimbrite holt all data assigned to median depth of km geochemical data from lowe value interpreted from melt composition and pluton emplacement at base of minarets volcanic pile tuttle and lowe geochemical data from lowe value and geochemical data from..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of minarets complex ignimbrite..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of post porphyry..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of red porphyry..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of post..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of red..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of norris creek leucogranite..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of shellenbarger lake granites..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of merced..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of jackass lakes granodiorite..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of timber knob leucogranite..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of the post peak mafic enclave..
geochemical values represent the average of samples of re melted merced..
lithos method ranges from and th at to at..
in order to monitor accuracy of the procedure aliquots of usgs standard whole rock powder gsp were dissolved and analyzed concurrently with the unknown measured values overlapped with accepted standard values within analytical errors..
for of the newly analyzed samples no new determinations were necessary as of the samples were collected from the same outcrops as those used by ague and exact locations and barometric determinations provided by ague pers..
comm and one of them was collected within few km of samples previously analyzed by ague and and and saleeby..
new determinations were made for three of the samples using the aluminum in hornblende barometer and zen all aluminum in hornblende barometric determinations including those from ague and were re calculated using the calibration of..
radiogenic heat production was calculated for each rock sample using accepted values of elemental heat generation with the assumption that all isotopes of each element occurred in natural abundances..
reasonable average density was assigned for each major rock type..
results depth of emplacement hpe abundances and radiogenic heat production values for the sample sites are reported in and..
in most cases hpe abundance data reported for each site represent the results from single sample collected from an intact outcrop of essentially uniform lithology..
in the case of data reported for sample sites from the minarets region of the sierra nevada the results for each sample site represent an average of all analyses of numerous hand samples from to collected from single geologic samples may have been collected as far as km apart within each unit lowe..
the resulting depth vs heat production plot shows definite depth dependent pattern in spite of significant scattering of heat production values at any given depth..
the upper km of the sampled sierran crust comprising the minarets complex ignimbrites has an average heat production value of..
heat production increases below this point with the highest values occurring between approximately and km paleodepth where measured heat production has median value of and peak value of..
between and km paleodepth the median heat production value is..
below km paleodepth radiogenic heat production decreases drastically having an average value of between and km..
discussion our empirically constrained depth vs heat production plot for the sierra nevada batholith is the first direct test of the exponential distribution model proposed by for this batholith and shows significant deviations from the predictions of that model..
while the observed overall downward decrease in radiogenic heat production is suggestive of an exponential curve calculated best fit exponential fails to predict most of the highly radiogenic material in the to km depth range and falls far below the median values for radiogenic heat production below km depth..
as an alternative to an exponential curve an interpretive empirically constrained model curve was constructed..
because this curve is based on data from late cretaceous xenoliths intrusions and metamorphic screens it represents late cretaceous depth vs heat production profile for the sierra nevada batholith..
this depth vs heat production profile may be valid representation of heat production in the sierran crust and upper mantle from late cretaceous until late miocene time because there was apparently no major alteration of the sierran crust and uppermost mantle until delamination of the sierran root occurred some time after ma and saleeby..
the middle and upper crustal portions of this curve should still apply to the central and northern sierra nevada if the batholith is more or less intact and northward plunging..
however the interpreted miocene or younger delamination of the sierran crustal root means..
no mantle heat flux ee depth km..
calculated steady state crustal geotherms for the preferred interpretive model assuming two extreme values of heat flux from the mantle to illustrate the total reasonable range of predicted crustal temperatures and for the conventional exponential distribution model..
in all cases thermal conductivity remained between and varying as function of temperature cull heat capacity was fixed at jkg crustal density was fixed at kg and the coefficient of thermal expansion was fixed at..
for the conventional exponential model the accepted average sierran surface heat flow of was used along with value of km and qr of qr was assumed to represent the heat flux from the mantle..
the grey box labeled corresponds to the range of temperatures determined from miocene lower crustal samples..
values the predicted basal crustal temperatures range from to..
the upper part of this range of values seems reasonable as it overlaps with the deep crust upper mantle equilibration temperatures of between and recorded geothermometrithe curve should not apply to the deeper portions of the modern sierra nevada batholith..
tectonic unroofing of the southern sierra nevada means that this profile is not expected to be representative of that region except at the surface..
the upper km of the interpretive model curve is fixed by the measured heat production value of the minarets ignimbrite holt..
below that point the curve increases linearly to the mean value for the shallow intrusives at the base of the minarets caldera complex..
it then decreases linearly to value of at km depth below which it remains constant to the base of the crust at km..
this constant value through the middle to lower crust seems reasonable not just as mean value for the observed data but also because the well exposed sierra nevada batholith shows no significant average compositional changes through most of this depth range..
the slopes from and km depth are chosen to be linear for simplicity and because there is insufficient control to justify more complex curve shape..
although the interpretive model curve is probably only valid representation until late miocene time its predictions regarding surface heat flow can be compared to modern surface heat flow measurements because the thermal effects of the interpreted miocene or younger lower crustal delamination should require several tens of millions of years to be conductively transmitted through the crust..
it predicts value of crustal heat production that falls within the range of values calculated for average surface heat flow implying low mantle heat flux..
it predicts mw of crustal heat production beneath each square meter of the sierran surface while average surface heat flow in the sierra nevada is between and depending on whether or not anomalously hot values are filtered out of the data set..
these values permit maximum mantle heat flux of at ma..
the steady state geotherm predicted by the interpretive model depends on the value that is chosen for heat flux from the mantle..
although mantle heat flux is poorly constrained both modeling of surface heat flow data and interpretation of our data set suggest that it is between and..
using this range of lithos cally in miocene samples and saleeby..
if the geothermometrically derived deep crust upper mantle temperature data are used to constrain the permissible basal crustal temperature and crustal heat production is assumed to be represented by the interpretive model curve then the heat flux from the mantle in miocene time is limited to range of to..
the low end of this range is roughly coincident with value suggested above by subtraction of the total model crustal heat production from the average observed surface heat flow..
the suggestion that nearly all of the surface heat flow comes from crustal radiogenic heat production and mantle heat flux is very low is also consistent with the results of modeling of fission track data which suggests rapid cooling of the sierran crust between and ma..
this rapid cooling of the sierran crust was originally interpreted as occurring due to direct contact with shallowly dipping oceanic slab that was subducted during the laramide orogeny henyey and lee but xenolith evidence for an intact subbatholith mantle lithosphere into the miocene and saleeby disallows the possibility of direct contact between the continental crust and subducting slab..
an alternative model for laramide cooling under the sierra nevada batholith has been proposed by saleeby who suggests that asthenospheric corner flow between the laramide slab and the sierran batholith was cut off by shallowing of the subduction angle of an kmwide portion of the slab that extended nne from southern california into southern wyoming immediately inboard of the sierra nevada batholith..
this should result in cessation of arc magmatism and conductive cooling of the sub sierran upper mantle since the latest cretaceous or early paleogene consistent with both the apatite fission track data and evidence from upper mantle xenoliths that suggests phanerozoic cooling from to..
the conductive cooling of mantle lithosphere under the sierra nevada apparently ceased in the late miocene or pliocene when the cold mantle lithosphere was replaced by hot mantle asthenosphere but this change has not yet affected the surface heat flow..
plio pleistocene xenolith thermobarometry petrography and geophysical data all show the presence of high temperature partial meltthe sierra bearing asthenosphere under much of nevada and saleeby..
this asthenosphere is thought to have been emplaced as result of delamination of the cold dense sierran root and is at least temporally related to basin and range extension..
the thermal pulse that should be generated by the emplacement of hot asthenosphere has not yet reached the this is consistent with the ma that should be required for the crust to re establish nearly steady state conductive geotherm..
the depth vs heat production plot clearly shows an interval of high radiogenic heat production from km depth which might represent zone of hydrothermal deposition of hpe rich minerals or zone of emplacement of highly differentiated hperich granitoids..
both hydrothermal alteration and magmatic differentiation have been proposed as primary controls on the distribution of in plutonic environments..
because our current data set was designed to provide crustal scale perspective on the distribution of radiogenic heat production it does not include detailed information about the distribution of th and within each sample as would be necessary to confidently separate the effects of these two mechanisms..
further work including detailed petrography and determination of the distribution of in primary and secondary minerals will be necessary to constrain the controls on hpe distribution in the sierra nevada batholith..
although do not have sufficient data to deterthe distribution of mine what process es control in the sierra nevada batholith can demonstrate that there is no strong correlation between hpe abundance and silica content..
silica content in the upper km of the sierran crust is relatively invariant average the average crust has the composition of granodiorite at shallow levels km and closer to tonalite at greater depths saleeby..
in contrast and th concentrations vary by factor of with depth concentrations also vary but to lesser extent..
paleodepth vs th and concentration for the sierra nevada batholith..
note that and th values vary more than values as function of comparison with clearly shows that intervals of high radiogenic heat production are dominantly due to high or th concentrations..
errors on concentration values are smaller than the refer to for depth determination errors..
the apparent lack of correspondence between silica content and radiogenic heat production in our data set from the sierran crust implies that seismic velocities cannot reliably be used as proxy for radiogenic heat production..
this result is in general agreement with the conclusions of fountain who used rock density and hpe measurements from the archean superior province of north america to suggest that heat production cannot be reliably predicted from seismic velocity..
it is in disagreement with earlier studies most noteably and who concluded that seismic wave velocities are exponentially related to rates of radiogenic heat production because both are related to the cation packing index of rocks..
our interpretations regarding the use of seismic velocities to infer hpe abundance agree with and strengthen the conclusions drawn by fountain but because our data set deals with large number of polymineralic rock samples it arguably provides more direct test of the model of and..
and the criticism of fountain suggested that of their model was not valid because his sample set was arbitrarily selected probably atypical rock types including anomalous rock types and possibly monomineralic rock types while their seismic velocity hpe abundance relationship was stochastic one valid for large sample sets of polymineralic rocks..
our data set is relatively large and is dominated by polymineralic intrusive rock types and it suggests that there is no simple correspondence between silica content and hpe abundance..
therefore although silica content might reasonably be inferred from seismic velocities hpe abundance probably cannot be..
as pointed out by fountain this is probably due moho depth km to the fact that seismic velocities are dominantly controlled by the abundant minerals in rock often quartz and feldspars while hpe abundance particularly and th are dominantly controlled by the accessory minerals..
the lack of correspondence between silica content and hpe abundance in our data set also suggests that the modeled thickness of radiogenic rich layer in the crust is not necessarily representative of the thickness of felsic intrusion or layer of intrusions..
in addition to constraining crustal heat production the paleodepth vs radiogenic heat production database provides valuable constraints on upper mantle heat production..
upper mantle heat production data are important in constraining mantle heat fluxes and models of lithospheric structure but such data are very limited in number and modeling of lithospheric thermal structure for any given heat flow province is therefore generally dependent on extrapolation of xenolith data from elsewhere..
radiogenic element abundance data for sierran xenoliths lithology..
densitya in the case of the sierra nevada batholith xenoliths suitable for both and geochemical analyses are available and they suggest that the upper mantle had mean radiogenic heat production rate of..
in addition several mantle xenoliths have been sampled that have no direct control but for which hpe analyses are available..
if these xenoliths are added to the calculation mean upper mantle heat production is..
these values are higher than most other reported averages for upper mantle heat production excluding..
most of these estimates however come from archean crustal sections where ongoing radioactive decay through..
ga means that heat production has decreased by factor of since the mid archean..
furthermore the sub sierran mantle wedge xenolith suite shows evidence of slab derived fluid enrichment in incompatible elements including and th total..
websterite carbonate eclogite eclogite eclogite wehrlite clinopyroxenite peridotite..
all data come from xenoliths entrained in miocene or older volcanics..
densities were not measured for each sample was chosen as reasonable value for upper mantle lithologies..
th which would increase its heat production relative to ancient cratonic regions..
if the mantle wedge from km depth had an average heat production of then it should contribute to the surface heat flux..
this is slightly greater than the maximum mantle heat flux calculated by subtracting our model crustal heat production from the average surface heat flow..
this in turn suggests that no heat from deeper portions of the mantle is reaching the surface of the sierra nevada consistent with the idea that flat cool laramide slab was underlying the sierran lithosphere at km..
cool oceanic slab at this depth would refrigerate the overlying lithosphere and insulate it from the deeper portions of the mantle..
conclusions radiogenic heat production within the sierra nevada batholith is probably not distributed exponentially as function of depth..
rather it may be nearly constant at..
through the volcanic pile near the top of the batholith then increase to values typically near at km paleodepth then decreasing again to by km paleodepth below which radiogenic heat production may remain more or less constant to the base of the crust..
the cretaceous mantle wedge that developed beneath the sierra nevada batholith to depths of km appears to have generated heat at rate of..
the exponential model of hpe distribution has been interpreted as possibly representing the effects of thin km highly radiogenic felsic batholith over an essentially non radiogenic midto lower crust..
our observation of non exponential distribution of and weak correlation between silica content and hpe abundance refutes such interpretations and suggests that surface heat flow data provides little constraint on the location or thickness of the felsic batholith..
our empirically constrained model for the distribution of radiogenic heat production predicts reasonable geothermal gradients that overlap with values determined from thermobarometry..
the model also predicts that radiogenic heat production in the sierran crust accounts for most or all of the present day surface heat flow implying that the mantle heat flux was very low at least until ma..
the non exponential form of the depth vs radiogenic heat production curve proposed herein does not predict or explain perfectly linear vs relationship for surface heat flow data..
however given the departures from linearity seen in the vs plot for the sierra nevada..
this may not be problem as the depth vs radiogenic heat production curve is crudely similar to an exponential at depths below km and most of the sierra nevada has had more than km of material erosionally removed..
the interpretive model curve may therefore be consistent with the crudely linear vs data plot..
acknowledgements this research was partially supported by nsf grants ear and saleeby ear and ear saleeby ear..
and california state university bakersfield urc grant..
the authors would like to thank and for assistance with analyses and data reduction and ague for providing access to his database of aluminum in hornblende barometry from the sierra nevada batholith..
would also like to thank two anonymous reviewers for their thorough and helpful comments..
introduction in completely brittle elastic materials crack is in stable state for stress intensity less than the critical stress intensity factor the latter being known as the fracture however the crack becomes unstable when the stress intensity factor reaches critical value and it begins to propagate rapidly..
the critical value of the associated rock strength is largely dependent on mineralogical properties such as the compositions and textures of the minerals and the quantity shape and orientation of preexisting cracks in the rock..
under certain environmental conditions especially high temperature or reactive environments delayed failures dependent on the time for crack growth are observed for most materials when static load below critical stress corresponding author..
see front matter elsevier ltd..
ijrmms intensity factor is applied..
this phenomenon known as sub critical crack growth depends on several possible mechanisms such as stress corrosion dissolution diffusion ion exchange and microplasticity..
among them stress corrosion is the main mechanism behind sub critical crack growth in shallow crustal conditions for the upper km of the earth crust..
first observed in by grenet using glasses stress corrosion has been reported in ceramics and minerals and rocks..
stress corrosion cracking was originally defined as environmentally induced sub critical crack growth under static stress..
recently this definition has been extended to include mechanical failure such as crack growth due to fatigue and creep stress in the absence of chemical phenomena..
therefore stress corrosion has to be understood not only in terms of the chemical parameters of the surrounding environment but also in terms of the mechanical factors..
however there are few experiments to clarify the effect of rock surrounding environment on its article in press..
international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences mechanical properties and strength..
in this research the influence of the surrounding environment and strain rate on the strength of rock is experimentally investigated..
the study of the long term strength of rock is necessary for examining the stability of underground openings such as caverns for hydraulic power plant and nuclear waste disposal constructed underground bearing in mind that the rock mass around an underground opening is generally in high humidity state due to the presence of groundwater..
since water is considered to be the most effective agent to promote stress corrosion of rock..
stress corrosion should be considered in estimating the long term strength of rock in the water or under water vapor environment..
however there have been few experiments to investigate the influence of the water vapor environment on rock strength..
to rectify this situation uniaxial compression tests were firstly performed under various environments different from atmospheric on kumamoto andesite..
the environments used in these tests were water vapor organic vapor such as methanol ethanol and acetone and inorganic gas such as argon nitrogen and oxygen..
the purpose was to establish whether water is the most effective agent in promoting stress corrosion of rock..
secondly series of uniaxial compression test was conducted under various water vapor pressures and strain rates..
by analyzing the mechanical behavior and the strength of the rock specimens the influence of water vapor pressure and strain rate on stress corrosion can be clarified..
furthermore the stress corrosion index from the experiment can be compared with those of other researchers..
finally the long term strength of rock can be discussed based on theory and experimental results obtained in this research..
experimental apparatus and specimen in order to control the surrounding environment of sample rock two chambers were made as shown in chamber is used for pressures below pa and room chamber is used for high pressures and high temperature below..
chamber which was made of has six ports and valve to inject gases..
in these ports two ports were used to lead the output from the strain gauges glued to the specimen surface..
two other ports measured the vapor pressure in the chamber by two pressure gauges namely the pirani and penning pressure gauges which had measurement range of and pa respectively..
one port was the window for observing inside the chamber and the other port with valve was used to evacuate the air in the chamber by vacuum pumps..
chamber had two ports gas injection valve and heater that controlled the temperature on the surface of the chamber..
in two ports the pressure transducer and the evacuation valve were connected..
the evacuation valve was linked to the two vacuum one was turbo molecular pump for high vacuum..
photograph of vacuum chamber for low chamber for high pressure..
and the other was rotary pump for low vacuum..
the evacuation velocity of the former was and the ultimate pressure was those the latter parameters were and pa respectively..
for kumamoto andesite was used as the experimental rock in this research..
this rock type is porphyritic consisting of plagioclase about hornblende and augite as phenocrysts in fine grained groundmass..
because kumamoto andesite is isotropic and homogeneous core was randomly drilled from cubic block..
the size of the specimens was mm in diameter and mm in length for uniaxial compression..
the ends of the specimen were polished flat to mm..
because the purpose of the work is to clarify the influence of the surrounding environment on the mechanical behavior of rock the water within rock should initially be removed completely..
for this purpose the specimens were dried at in the oven for about days for the uniaxial compression tests..
the changes of the longitudinal wave velocity vp and unit weight of the specimen during drying are shown in..
international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences flange with bellows upper flange rod for compression specimen rod for compression lower flange..
schematic diagram of the setup of the specimen in the chamber..
start of the test saturated pressure of water vapor injection of distilled water time pressure pa..
change of the pressure in the chamber during the test..
note that the purpose of these tests was to investigate the surrounding environment on the the influence of strength of rock..
however it is difficult to permeate the surrounding gas into the rock in only under the condition of pressure of pa which value is smaller than that of atmospheric pressure since the coefficient of air permeability of the rock is low..
therefore the inside environment of the rock is considered to be different form the outside one..
consequently the penetration of the surrounding gas into the rock is not considered in the tests..
results the testing conditions and results of the uniaxial compression test are listed in..
the pressure in the chamber was pa and the strain rate was wave velosity unit weight days vp..
change of the longitudinal wave velocity and unit weight of the specimen during drying..
axis represents vp and and the horizontal axis shows the elapsed time of drying on log scale..
vp and of the specimen before drying are plotted for the first day..
the vp and were and after drying..
the specimens were kept in desiccator after drying..
servo controlled testing machine having capacity of kn was used for the uniaxial compression tests and the loading was controlled via constant strain rate..
influence of the surrounding environment..
experimental procedure the non atmospheric environment thus uniaxial compression tests on kumamoto andesite in non atmospheric environments were conducted to investigate the effect of surrounding environments on the strength of rock..
the tests were performed at the constant in the pressure of chamber pa and at constant strain rate using chamber the environments used in this research were methanol ethanol and acetone as organic vapor and argon nitrogen oxygen and hydrogen as inorganic gas and water vapor..
non atmospheric environment can be produced by injecting new vapor or gas environment after evacuating the air in the chamber..
the cross section of the chamber in which the specimens were set up is shown in..
the upper and lower flanges each had rod for applying compression..
the load was transmitted to the specimen through the rods by compressing the flanges from the testing machine..
shows an example of variation of the pressure in the chamber during testing..
at first the air was evacuated by two vacuum pumps..
after that water or organic material or gas was put in through the injection valve until the pressure of the chamber became the saturated pressure of water vapor at room temperature pa..
it was assumed that the air in the chamber can be fully changed to new environment..
then the uniaxial compression test was performed after maintaining the new environment for about young modulus and poisson ratio which were the ultimate strength in each measured at of environment are plotted as shown in..
the values of young modulus range between and gpa..
however young moduli in inorganic environments were higher than those in organic and water vapor environments..
on the other hand the poisson ratio was almost independent of the environments and was estimated to be..
the uniaxial compressive strength ucs sc in each environment is shown in..
the uniaxial compressive strength in the water vapor environment averaged..
those in methanol ethanol and acetone were on average and respectively..
it is clear that the strength decreases in order of acetone ethanol methanol and water vapor..
note that the results for and the ucs in and follow the same trend..
in the inorganic environments of argon nitrogen and oxygen the ucs was on average in spite of scatter in the nitrogen results..
it is considered that an inorganic environmental dependence on the strength does environment gpa..
no strain rate strength testing conditions and results of uniaxial compression tests water vapor methanol vapor ethanol vapor acetone vapor argon nitrogen oxygen article in press..
international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences lateral axial materials..
plot of young modulus and poisson ratio in each environment..
water vapor ethanol vapor methanol vapor acetone vapor argon oxygen nitrogen..
gpa acetone ethanol methanol water vapor volumetric argon argon oxygen nitrogen oxygen nitrogen acetone ethanol methan ol water vapor compressive stress water vapor ethanol vapor argon oxygen methanol vapor acetone vapor nitrogen materials sc..
plot of uniaxial compressive strength in each environment..
axial lateral and volumetric strain curves of uniaxial compression test in each environment..
the axial the uniaxial lateral and volumetric strain curves compression test under water vapor organic vapor and inorganic gas environments are shown in..
the stress strain curves were only taken to the peak stress because there was no intention to monitor the post failure effect..
two or three tests were conducted for each environment and the results for each environment are shown..
the water vapor environment had the weakest strength while the inorganic environment was the strongest..
the young modulus was different in each environment..
international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences not exist..
these tendencies were similar to the plots of young modulus and the ucs in water vapor environment was about times of that in inorganic environments..
thus it is concluded that water influences the mechanical behavior of rock in line with atkinson and who considered that water is the most effective agent in promoting stress corrosion in the sub critical crack growth of rock..
therefore the effect of water on the mechanical behavior of rock is further clarified in detail in the following section..
stress corrosion and the strength of rock stress corrosion is the reaction between strained silicate minerals and environmental agents at the crack tip in rock and is one of most important mechanisms of sub critical crack growth..
the surface energy of the crack tip drops due to stress corrosion so that the crack propagates more easily at lower stress level..
it is known that stress corrosion cracking occurs due to the characteristics of the surrounding environment such as viscosity pressure temperature humidity ph etc..
among these characteristics the existence of water in the surrounding environment is closely related to the stress corrosion of rock..
the action of stress corrosion is represented by the following equation þ si si si oh in order to express the sub critical crack growth due to stress corrosion two types of equation are namely power law and an exponential law..
these equations are suggested as the empirical relation between the crack velocity and tensile stress at the crack tip..
suggested use of the power law in order to analyze the rock and experimental relation between strength of parameters such as stress and strain rate water vapor dt..
apnwsn research these equations are used for the subsequent analysis of experimental results..
influence of water vapor pressure..
experimental procedure series of uniaxial compression tests on kumamoto andesite was conducted under various water vapor pressures..
the two vacuum chambers in were used in the experiment..
shows the variation of the pressure in the chamber during the test with low pressure..
after replacing the air with water vapor in the chamber the water vapor was re exhausted to the required value..
this water vapor pressure was maintained for about and then the uniaxial compression test was performed..
for the high pressure in the first step saturated vapor pressure at room temperature was established using the processes adopted for the low pressure..
in that time little liquid water was created in the bottom of the chamber..
secondly by applying heat with the heater attached to chamber high vapor pressure was created by the evaporation of the water in the chamber..
the vapor pressure was maintained for about after that the uniaxial compression test was performed..
since strain gages could not be glued on the specimen due to the high temperature the strain of the specimen was obtained from the displacement of the actuator of the testing machine as at first the stiffness of the loading systems namely the testing machine and the chamber was obtained from the uniaxial compression test using steel specimen..
then the displacement of the rock specimen was estimated from the measured displacement of the actuator and the axial strain was calculated by dividing the displacement by the specimen length..
restart of exhaust start of the test injection of distilled water time pressure pa where dt is the crack velocity constant the water vapor pressure nw is the order of the rate limiting chemical reaction and is the local tensile stress near the crack tip..
using eq and statistical model of crack distribution within rock and suggested the following..
þ log for being constant log sc þ log..
for being constant log sc nw þ log in these equations becomes stress corrosion index when nw is assumed to be equal to unity..
change of the pressure in the chamber during the test for low pressure article in press international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences gpa strength young modulus sc temperature..
uniaxial compressive strength and young modulus at each temperature..
testing conditions and results of uniaxial compression tests in water vapor environment failure type see..
text temperature gpa strength no..
pressure pa strain rate ii ii..
ii ii ii ii the failure mode of the kumamoto andesite specimens was classified into two namely type failure with or shear planes and type ii failure with tension failure and shear planes as shown in..
the failure type for each specimen is summarized in..
comparison of the strength of specimens conducted under almost the same water vapor pressure specimens and showed that the strength of type ii was about less than that of type it is considered that the effective cross sectional area was reduced owing to the progress of the exfoliation of the specimen and as result the manifested strength was smaller..
young modulus and ucs sc were plotted with water vapor pressure as shown in..
the young modulus appeared independent of water vapor pressure and its average value was gpa..
the strengths of the two failure types and ii are plotted as closed and opened circles because heater was used to ensure high water vapor pressure due to temperature the influence of temperature on strength of rock had to be clarified before the tests..
for this purpose series of uniaxial compression test was conducted on kumamoto andesite using chamber under atmospheric environment at various temperatures namely room temperature and..
the stress axial strain curves at each temperature are shown in..
for the temperatures of and failure occurred at the lower strain level..
the strain level at failure increases with increasing temperature..
the relation between the ucs sc and young modulus at each temperature is shown in..
the results show that the increase in temperature up to had only small effect on the ucs and young modulus in this research..
the reason is considered that the drying temperature of the specimen was..
accordingly it was concluded that the influence of temperatures on the ucs and young modulus was negligible in these tests..
uniaxial compression tests were conducted on kumamoto andesite under various water vapor pressures..
firstly the specimens were tested totally in the water vapor environment..
the pressure in the chamber was..
pa varied from to the testing conditions and results of the uniaxial compression test in the water vapor environment are shown in..
the typical stress axial strain curves are shown in..
those show straight lines generally except two curves..
the ucs was relatively high in the case of the lower water vapor pressure..
strain rate and the strain stress..
stress axial strain curves of uniaxial compression test at various temperatures in the atmosphere..
international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences log type..
stress axial strain curves of uniaxial compression test..
failure mode of the specimen for kumamoto failure with or shear planes and failure with tension failure and shear planes is clear that respectively..
it the ucs increases with decreasing water vapor pressure the slopes of the straight lines calculated by the least squares method were in both types..
this means that the effect of water vapor in the rock was similar regardless of the type of failure..
the ucs seemed to continue to increase with decreasing water vapor pressure..
young modulus and uniaxial compressive strength with the water vapor pressure..
closed and opened circles represent the results of failure types and ii respectively..
that it will approach the ucs of intact rock under an anhydrous environment..
experimental procedure in order to investigate the influence of the loading rate in the same environment uniaxial compression tests were conducted in water vapor environment..
the tests were accomplished for three strain rate and the control of water vapor pressure in the chamber was the same as used for the tests four the influence of vapor pressure..
three or for specimens were tested for each strain rate at different water vapor pressure levels..
results the testing conditions and results for the uniaxial compression test are shown in..
the water vapor pressure ranged between and pa..
the ucs increased with decreasing water vapor pressure..
the young modulus and poisson ratio measured at stress level of of the strength are shown in..
it was considered that within the experimental parameters used here young modulus and poisson ratio are not affected by strain rate and that their mean values were gpa and respectively..
the influence of water vapor pressure on ucs sc in the case of the three strain rates is shown in which has double logarithmic co ordinates..
the ucs increased log sc log log sc log strength pa..
uniaxial compressive strength against water vapor pressure for each strain rate on the double logarithmic co ordinates..
correlation of uniaxial compressive strength with the ratio of strain rate to water vapor pressure via double logarithmic co ordinates..
linear regression curve is also shown..
the stress corrosion index calculated from eq is estimated to be..
discussion stress corrosion is reaction between hydroxyl groups and si bonds at the crack tip..
therefore it is clear that the stress corrosion cannot occur in an the chemical testing conditions and results of uniaxial compression tests for various water vapor pressures and strain rates..
young modulus gpa poisson ratio pa..
young modulus closed and poisson ratio opened for each strain rate..
linearly with decreasing water vapor pressure for the same strain rate and with increasing strain rate..
the slopes of the three lines obtained by least squares method for each strain rate were almost the same and corresponded to the term in eq..
thus the stress corrosion index of kumamoto andesite was not affected by strain rate in the range of this research..
the average stress corrosion index can be estimated as regardless of strain rate..
also the ucs increased with increasing strain rate for similar water vapor pressure and showed relatively high values for lower water vapor pressure..
the results regarding water vapor pressure and strain rate were replotted for the strength versus strain water vapor pressure using double logarithmic co ordinates as shown in..
in the figure the horizontal axis represents the ratio of strain rate to water vapor pressure to..
the ucs appears linearly proportional article in press international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences article in press international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences dolerite norite quartzite oshima granite kumamoto andesite carrara marble sandstone laurencekirk sandstone berea sandstone after john after after sangha after this research charcoal granite strength..
relations between the strength of rock and the ratio of displacement rate and water vapor pressure and comparison of stress corrosion indices of various rocks and minerals by john sangha and and with those in this paper closed symbols..
via double logarithmic co ordinates as shown in..
the vertical axis represents the strength and the horizontal axis the ratio of strain rate and water vapor pressure..
the experimental environments of john sangha and and..
were regarded as atmospheric so that the water vapor pressure was assumed accordingly..
the water vapor pressure used by was calculated from the temperature and relative humidity during testing..
the power law dependence of strength on water vapor pressure appears clearly..
the stress corrosion indices obtained from the slope of the linear regression curves are indicated in..
according to this figure the stress corrosion indices range from to..
the crystalline rocks primarily composed of silicates minerals seem to have similar stress corrosion index around..
the stress corrosion index for kumamoto andesite with varying water vapor pressure and strain rate was estimated from the uniaxial compression test to be on average..
the stress corrosion indices obtained in this research are in harmony with those of other researchers..
also showed the influence of the partial pressure of water vapor on the ucs from the results of charles krokosky and and inorganic environment since there are no hydroxyl groups in inorganic gases..
the molecules of methanol and ethanol have hydroxyl groups..
silica is essentially insoluble in methanol and ethanol under standard conditions..
however since the energy state at the crack tip is considered to be very high under loading the reactions described by the following equations may take place in methanol and ethanol environments respectively..
sið þ þ and þ..
sið þ þ in these reactions water may be generated and used for the reaction of stress corrosion represented by the reaction..
furthermore the solubility of silica in ethanol has been reported to be lower than that in methanol at the same high temperature..
therefore the amount of water generated from the reaction in methanol environment may be more than that in ethanol..
it is considered that the degree of stress corrosion in methanol was greater than that in the ethanol environment..
wiederhorn derived an equation for crack velocity related to the hydroxyl ion concentration..
at the crack tip as dt oh nw exp rt where dt is the crack velocity experimentally determined constant the temperature nw the order of the rate limiting chemical reaction with respect to oh and is the change of free energy as the chemical reaction goes from the initial to the final state..
according to eq oh is one of the most important factors in sub critical crack growth for stress corrosion in rock..
the reaction at the crack tip followed reaction in the water vapor environment..
on the other hand in the organic vapor environment having the hydroxyl group such as in methanol and ethanol the reactions of or may first occur and subsequently..
assuming that the free energy level at the crack tip is the same in both environments the crack velocity may be fastest in the water vapor environment and be slower in the methanol and ethanol environment..
because of that the concentration of oh was the highest in the water vapor environment and decreased in the order of methanol and ethanol environments..
consequently it was considered that the strength was the lowest in the water vapor environment and highest in the inorganic environment..
from these considerations it is concluded that water is the most effective agent which promotes stress corrosion of rock among the materials used in this research..
secondly the stress corrosion index in the water vapor environment will be discussed as compared with the results from other researchers..
the data in and were replotted together with the results for various other rocks from john sangha and andarticle in press..
international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences simplify the discussion however it is assumed that the ucs is the creep strength and that the time consumed from start of loading to failure in the uniaxial compression test is the time to failure in creep test..
in this research the ucs is on average at water vapor pressure of pa..
the open circle is plotted as the ucs and then the line can be drawn through the plot with slope of..
the value of the stress corrosion index of kumamoto andesite is adopted to be in consideration of the water vapor pressure and strain rate..
from this procedure the longterm strength after for example years can be estimated as..
this value is of the short term ucs..
furthermore the ucs of kumamoto andesite can be increased to times when the water vapor pressure is decreased to times the saturated water vapor pressure at room temperature..
substituting this value for eq the time to failure to the long term strength of can be calculated as about years namely times more..
consequently it is important that the water vapor pressure in an underground opening is kept lower to ensure its stability for longer time..
conclusions the influence of surrounding environments and strain rate on the strength of rock under various conditions using kumamoto andesite was investigated..
the stress corrosion index can be obtained from results of series of uniaxial compression test under various vapor pressures and strain rates..
firstly series of uniaxial compression test under various surrounding environments was performed..
as result the environmental dependence on strength was found to be strongest for water vapor and it decreased in the..
acetone ethanol methanol and water vapor..
however the strength in inorganic environments was found to be independent of surrounding environments..
this was considered to be caused by the difference in the hydroxyl ion concentration which promotes sub critical crack growth due to stress corrosion of the rock..
it is concluded that water is the most effective agent to promote stress corrosion which is the ubiquitous presence of groundwater around deep underground excavations..
significant because of secondly series of uniaxial compression tests on kumamoto andesite was conducted under various vapor pressures in order to clarify the effect of water vapor pressure on stress corrosion..
the strength of rock in water vapor environment increased as the water vapor pressure decreased and the strain rate increased..
furthermore the stress corrosion index was not changed as the strain rate changed..
from the observations the stress corrosion index could be determined..
the value was evaluated to be with consideration of the water vapor pressure and strain rate..
estimation of long term strength of kumamoto andesite based on theory and stress corrosion index..
the stress corrosion index for kumamoto andesite commonly consisting of plagioclase nearly coincides with that of albite..
compared with double torsion tests conducted by other researchers the stress corrosion index for kumamoto andesite is similar to the value of for yugawara andesite from..
putting these results together the stress corrosion indices obtained from the different testing methods or conditions are almost the same..
furthermore they concur well with the results of other researchers..
consequently it was concluded that the stress corrosion index could well be constant for all rock types..
it is almost constant regardless of testing methods failure types and loading conditions..
however it is factor that depends on the surrounding environment and may vary in value owing to the difference in hydroxyl ion concentration present..
finally the long term strength of rock is discussed based on our results because the rock mass around an underground opening is under high humidity due to the groundwater..
after completion of the opening an induced stress is produced around it..
considering that this stress state may be unchanged in future the stress state is regarded as time dependent loading..
suggested the relation between the time to failure tf and creep stress as log tf log þ where is the stress corrosion index and constant determined from creep test..
this equation corresponds to the results of other researchers..
according to this equation the long term strength can be estimated via..
at first the creep strength should be obtained from short term creep tests..
in order to years tf year article in press international journal of rock mechanics mining sciences compared with the results of other researchers the stress corrosion index obtained in this research showed good agreement and for given rock was found to be almost constant regardless of testing methods failure types and loading conditions..
it can be concluded that the stress corrosion index is material constant representing one of the mechanical properties of rock..
finally the long term strength of kumamoto andesite after years can be estimated as based on theory and the stress corrosion index obtained in the experiment..
this value is of the ucs value obtained in short term tests..
furthermore since the time to failure was found to be delayed by decreasing water vapor pressure in the surrounding environment it is important that the water vapor pressure in an underground opening is kept at low value to ensure the stability of an underground excavation for longer time..
introduction geothermal heat has been identified as renewable and reliable energy source given the severe environmental impacts created by conventional fossil fuels such as coal and oil..
exploratory geothermal wells have therefore been drilled to test the availability of geothermal reservoir corresponding author deep earth energy laboratory department of civil engineering monash university building melbourne victoria australia..
rocks rocks at elevated temperatures and deep granite reservoirs have been found to have adequate temperatures to serve as geothermal reservoirs fox et al..
such explorations involve finding vast blocks of hot rocks with fracture systems..
such rocks can be used to generate electricity..
in this process water is first injected and circulated through the fractures in the geothermal reservoirs and eventually pumped back to the surface as steam..
however the exploration of geothermal resources has become challenge to engineers and geologists due to the high temperature and stress environments in geothermal reservoirs..
for this reason laboratory experiments conducted under high pressure and temperature conditions geothermal conditions can assist in providing..
large number of laboratory experiments has therefore been conducted since to investigate the influence of high pressure and temperature on rock in relation to geothermal heat extraction deep geological disposal of nuclear waste paquet and franc ois deep mining wawersik and hannum and geological storage dai et al..
the mechanical behaviour of reservoir rocks is significantly influenced by elevated temperatures because they cause the micro structure of the rock mass to be altered through thermal expansion the development of new micro cracks extending or widening the existing micro cracks and various mineralogical alterations..
rock strength deformation criteria change with temperature and some rock mechanical properties such as compressive strength tensile strength elastic modulus cohesive strength and friction angle decrease with increasing temperature..
however such alterations are also affected by the confinement applying on the rock mass and confining pressure causes the suppression of thermal cracks and the widening of existing micro cracks..
this results in further alteration of the rock mass mechanical properties resulting in changing failure modes..
studies have identified the transition of rock failure mode from brittle to ductile with increasing confinement..
however this transition is diverse due to the different mineralogical compositions and grain boundaries in different rocks..
although many studies have been conducted to investigate the temperature dependent mechanical behaviour of reservoir rocks most experiments have been conducted in unconfined environments..
pre heating the specimens to the corresponding temperature ranges and testing at room temperatures has been frequently done but the method is not reliable as geothermal reservoirs experience continuous thermal stresses..
such limitations have occurred mainly due to the limited number of appropriate test facilities available to simulate the stress and temperature conditions of actual geothermal reservoirs..
although some studies have analytically and numerically evaluated the mechanical properties of rocks under high temperatures and pressures to date none has captured the stress strain behaviour and failure criteria of rocks over wide range of confining pressures and temperatures particularly for australian granite..
however the thermo elastic response and appropriate failure criteria are essential inputs for many engineering applications under high pressures and temperatures including geothermal extraction applications..
this study therefore intends to fill this gap and it is hoped it will make an important contribution to many deep underground applications..
tested material granite is an abundant crystalline rock in the earth with medium to coarse grains which was formed as result of the slow cooling of magma..
granite therefore has abundant radioactive elements th and..
such elements bring elevated geothermal gradients to deep granite reservoirs which therefore have ideal conditions as geothermal reservoirs..
the mineralogical composition of granite mainly consists of quartz feldspar plagioclase and biotite and small amounts of muscovite amphibole hornblende and opaque..
for the present study samples were collected from the strathbogie batholith which is composite granitoid intrusion body spreading over more than in km north east from melbourne..
strathbogie granite is high level discordant..
sampling location of strathbogie batholith in central victoria..
physical mechanical and petrographic properties of strathbogie granite obtained under room temperature and atmospheric pressure conditions..
rock type granite colour average grain size petrographic description bulk density compressive strength mpa elastic modulus gpa porosity white with dark brown mainly consists of feldspar biotite quartz and plagioclase equigranular coarse grained type granite results of xrd analysis..
mineral id alpha quartz sodic and intermediate plagioclase biotite phlogopite feldspar clinochlore muscovite sericite dolomite ankerite other minerals granite that mainly consists of quartz feldspar cordierite and biotite..
the selected granite type is coarsegrained and white and dark brown in colour with around porosity..
presents close up view of typical strathbogie granite sample an optical microscopic image and an sem image of its thin section..
as can be seen in clear mineralogical assembling can be observed in the granite specimen mainly with quartz feldspar and plagioclase..
as shown in the grain size was measured from thin section of this granite and found to be with only small number mainly in the range of mm of larger grains mm shao et al..
summarizes the physical mechanical and petrographic properties of the tested strathbogie granite..
in addition an xrd analysis was conducted to determine the mineralogical composition of the selected granite and the result is shown in..
as the table shows quartz is the predominant mineral in the selected granite followed by of sodic and intermediate biotite and of plagioclase..
the mineralogical composition of this particular granitic composition is representative of the composition of the majority of the earth granites..
all the physical properties in and..
close up view of sample microscopic image of thin section of sample sem image of thin section of sample..
were obtained by conducting various tests in the xrd analysis mineral composition uniaxial compression testing compressive strength elastic modulus thin section analysis average grain size mercury intrusion testing porosity and volume and weight measurement bulk density..
sample preparation sample preparation and testing were carried out at the deep earth energy research laboratory deerl in the civil engineering department of monash university and the sample preparation was conducted in accordance with the astm standard for tri axial compressive testing astm..
in order to maintain consistency all the samples were cored to mm in diameter using the same block of granite at the same orientation..
during the sampling great care was taken to obtain samples with the same crystalline orientation and samples with different crystalline orientation internal layers and visible cracks were discarded..
it should be noted that coring induced rock microstructure alteration is an important aspect to consider in laboratory experiments although few studies have considered this effect..
to avoid such issues very small coring rate was adopted and water was used as lubricant..
the cored specimens were then cut into mm high cylinders and both ends of the specimens were ground to produce two parallel surfaces perpendicular to the axes of the cylindrical specimens..
experimental procedure tri axial experiments were conducted on samples under four different confining pressures and four different temperatures rt..
these experimental conditions were selected because the most preferable hot dry rock systems are generally located at depths of km and have around mpa mpa confining pressures and temperatures of breede et al..
the different confining pressures and temperatures were selected to simulate the reservoir depth effect and to obtain sufficient data set to understand the failure criteria under different temperatures..
the complete arrangement of the tri axial cell is shown in..
the prepared sample was first placed inside the cell and the required confining pressure was then applied using silicon oil system and an annealed copper sleeve was used to isolate the sample from the confining liquid refer to..
mica insulated metal band heater was used to heat the pressure cell and consequently the rock sample..
the temperatures of the cell were adjusted using controller and constant small heating rate of min was used to prevent micro structural damage due to sudden thermal shocks..
two separate thermocouples were used to achieve precise temperature control and the reading of the thermocouple installed inside the cell was recorded by the data acquisition system..
the other thermocouple that was attached to the barrel was used to control the band heater..
furthermore the barrel and the top of the pressure cell were covered using an insulating blanket to reduce heat loss during the experiments and to minimise the influence of air flows towards the cell..
all the tests were started once the system had achieved steady state to ensure uniformity in temperature and pressure across the sample..
equilibrium was ensured by monitoring the confinement pump volume and the thermocouple readings inside the cell located very close to the specimen..
under steady state conditions constant pump volume and constant temperature were observed and testing was initiated..
constant loading pump flow rate of min was adopted for all the test specimens and the converted displacement rate was min..
it should be noted that small shaft resistance exists as result of the sealing of the hydraulic cylinder and this effect was considered in the calibration of the loading cell..
the sealing resistance was obtained by measuring the pump pressure to initiate movement in the loading shaft and this was deducted from each pressure reading to eliminate the resistance of the sealing dur..
using the typical mohr coulomb brittle deformation..
the deviatoric stress strain plots of the granite samples exhibited concave upward curvilinear trends from initial loading to the peak value beyond which strain softening occurred causing rapid stress drop to residual value..
increasing peak stress with increasing confining pressure can be observed which is to be expected according to typical mohr coulomb type brittle failure..
traditionally rock failure in compression can occur in two main dilatancy and failure by strain softening under relatively low confining pressures and failure by strain hardening under elevated confining pressures and transitional regime may be observed at intermediate pressures..
these transitional failure modes have been referred to as quasi brittle and complex localized features such as conjugate shear bands can be observed under such conditions..
by visual inspection of the post failure samples important information about the alteration of the granite failure mechanism with confining pressures and temperatures can be identified..
postfailure images were therefore collected after each test..
according to the post failure images specimens that failed at mpa confining pressures mainly failed by shear localization along an inclined macroscopic shear band with single shear zone across each sample..
however samples tested at higher confinements of mpa and mpa at exhibited strain hardening characteristics after achieving the peak stress and several conjugate shear bands could be observed on the cylindrical sample surface instead of the single shear band observed earlier..
this characteristic was significant at mpa confining pressure..
however it should be noted that only one test was conducted at mpa confinement because at such high confining pressures the corresponding failure load of granite exceeds the bottom pedestal load bearing capacity..
further progressive reduction was observed in the failure plane angle with respect to the minor principal stress direction with increasing confining pressure which implies reduction in friction angle possibly due to the greater quasi brittle behaviour that was shown by granite samples at higher confining pressures..
effect of temperature and confining pressure on mechanical properties of strathbogie granite illustrates the influence of temperature on the deviatoric stress of the tested granite under each confinement..
as the figure shows the influence of confinement is more significant than that of temperature in the temperature range considered here..
wong and brace confirm that at lower confining pressures considerable thermal cracking occurs at relatively low temperatures..
if thermal cracking is responsible for the reduction in failure strength sharp reduction in deviatoric stress with increasing temperature with suppression of thermal cracks should be exhibited under unconfined pressure condition..
however based on the experimental results under unconfined conditions up to of increment in deviatoric stress is followed by and reductions at and respectively..
however when confinement was applied strength reduction was initiated after higher temperature of mainly due to the inhibition of thermal cracks by induced compressive force..
thermal cracking is therefore an important strength property alteration mechanism in reservoir rocks under certain confining pressure conditions..
clear influence of temperature on deviatoric stress at any depth or confinement can be observed and increasing the temperature from room temperature to causes an increment in deviatoric stress and further increasing of temperature to causes slight reduction in it..
this is because the thermal expansion which occurs with increasing temperature causes the reduction of..
high pressure high temperature tri axial machine inside view of the cell..
however it should be noted that compared to the large axial load this resistance is negligible which is only of maximum measurement..
during the load application the axial strain was measured using linear variable differential transducers lvdts attached to the ram of the load cell..
an acoustic emission ae system was also employed in the testing of samples to record the data related to the fracturing process..
the ae system adopted was peripheral component interconnection pci system with nominal resolution frequency of khz..
during the experiments two sensors were attached to either side of the loading shaft and with the external amplifiers which generated low frequency acoustic waves with the fracturing of the sample..
in addition possible micro structural and mineralogical changes that occurred during thermal and confinement effects were checked using sem analyses..
the overall stress strain response the influence of temperature on the stress strain behaviour of the tested granite was considered first and the test results deviatoric load at failure deviatoric stress at failure triaxial compressive strength and elastic modulus are given in..
illustrates the relationships between deviatoric stress and axial strain curves for the samples tested at and mpa confining pressures at various temperatures..
in relation to the stress strain curves of the strathbogie granite under triaxial loading the corresponding failure modes were characterized..
mechanical properties of strathbogie granite at different test temperatures and pressures..
temperature confining pressure mpa deviatoric load at failure kn mpa mpa elastic modulus gpa mpa mpa mpa mpa axial strain mpa mpa mpa mpa..
mpa mpa mpa mpa mpa mpa axial strain mpa mpa mpa mpa axial strain axial strain..
corresponding stress strain responses of granite at different temperatures..
rt the distance between the interfaces of individual minerals which increases their mutual attraction and bonding strength..
however further increase of temperature causes the crystalline particles of the rock mass to fracture through pre existing grain boundaries between mineral grains with different thermoelastic moduli and thermal conductivities resulting in reduced rock strength..
according to the tri axial experimental studies conducted by wong and tullis and yund increasing the temperature leads to reduction in the failure stress of westerly granite under any..
post failure images of tested specimens..
the reductions of strength characteristics were relatively small up to and beyond that an accelerated downward trend was identified..
furthermore wider localized zones were observed at high temperatures in the post failure images..
however these studies were conducted at wider temperature ranges up to and respectively and the researchers therefore did not pay close attention to reservoir rock behaviour under relatively low geothermal temperature ranges..
this was the focus of the present study according to which there is an initial strengthening and stiffening in granite with increasing temperature at low temperatures up to and increasing the temperature beyond certain value causes gradual reduction in failure stress with increasing temperature..
elastic modulus is an important mechanical property of any reservoir rock and describes the brittle characteristics of the rock mass..
it is therefore often used to evaluate many in situ stress applications including wellbore stability fracturing possibility and tectonic stress distribution..
the temperature dependent brittle properties elastic modulus of the tested granite were then evaluated..
the elastic region of each stress strain curve was used to calculate the temperature and pressure dependent young moduli and the results are shown in..
the axial strain was measured using lvdts attached to the loading ram with linearity..
full scale mm and infinite resoluerror of tion no hysteresis..
an increment of the modulus of strathbogie granite with increasing temperature up to can be observed and further increase of temperature to causes the elastic modulus to be slightly reduced for any confinement..
consistent with the temperature dependent strength behaviour of the granite described above..
the reason for the initial elastic module increment may be that the specimen becomes more brittle at the initial temperature ranges due to thermally induced volumetric expansion and the associated pore volume reduction..
the later slight reduction of young modulus with increasing temperature exhibits an enhancement in ductile behaviour quasi brittle characteristics with further increase of temperature..
this is possibly due to the increased crack density caused by the induced thermal crack development and the related weakening of the granite..
brittle or general increment in elastic modulus with increasing confinement can be observed until mpa and further increase of confinement reduces the young modulus conincreasing confining stress additional plastic siderably..
with deformation occurs exhibiting strain hardening characteristics in granite under high confinements..
however within the range of the experiments conducted mpa mpa it cannot be definitively identified as ductile regime..
however the strain hardening behaviour observed at mpa indicates transitional characteristics and this can be identified as quasi brittle behaviour..
the initial young modulus reduction with increasing confinement was observed by heard and page who conducted tests up to mpa confining pressure..
however the latter behaviour was not observed by these researchers..
interestingly according to the research literature at low temperatures some granite types are more temperature sensitive while in contrast some granites are more temperature sensitive at high temperatures..
the initial strength enhancement is more significant for coarse grained granites and granodiorite than for fine grained granites..
for example according to heard and page stripa granite is more sensitive to temperature at relatively low temperatures and westerly granite is more sensitive to temperature at high temperatures..
such contradictory behaviours may occur in granite due to the different grain size distributions grain orientations mineralogical compositions and heterogeneity of different granite types..
this indicates the importance of studying the mineralogical composition and microstructural influence of granites on such on temperature dependent strength variations..
effect of temperature on shear strength parameters of strathbogie granite illustrates the variation of deviatoric stress of the tested granite with confining pressure for each temperature..
the figure shows that increasing confinement causes the granite deviatoric stress to increase non linearly and gradually come to steady state..
this is consistent with similar previous studies which have clearly shown the enhancement of rock strength with increasing confinement and the increasing rate is reduced with increasing confining pressure..
this is because at low confining pressures there is high dilation potential..
therefore the ability to open rock micro cracks is high resulting in higher friction angles..
however this dilation potential and the corresponding tendency for micro cracks to open are suppressed with increasing confinement resulting in lower friction angles at higher confining pressures..
therefore the failure mechanism of the rocks shifts from brittle to ductile with increasing confinement changing the shape of the mohr coulomb failure envelope and according to barton at critical confining pressure the mohr coulomb failure envelope reaches zero gradient..
this has also been shown by hoek..
the present study has clearly identified this rock behaviour in the mohr coulomb failure envelopes developed for each temperature condition refer to..
according to the traditional linear mohr coulomb criteria are applicable only in the brittle region of the failure envelope and at higher temperature mpa mpa mpa unconfined mpa..
variation of deviatoric stress with different temperatures under tested confining pressures..
mpa mpa mp temperature mpa mpa gpa..
variation of elastic modulus versus confining pressure for different temperatures..
variation of deviatoric stress versus confining pressure for different temperatures..
corresponding mohr coulomb failure envelopes..
cohesion mpa temperature friction ang le friction angle..
variation in friction angle and cohesion with different temperatures considering linear region of the mohr coulomb failure envelope..
the latter positive effect of temperature on cohesion according to wong and brace increasing the temperature to an extreme value may cause weakening of the grain boundaries dependent on the anisotropy of the rock matrix due to potentially existing distinct mineral compounds in granite those may contain different thermo elastic moduli and this may causes to generate different internal stresses with heating..
according to wong and brace increasing the temperature causes the induction of thermal cracks in the rock mass due to the associated generation of internal stresses eq where is the matrix young modulus difference of thermal expansion coefficient of distinct mineral and temperature difference respectively..
when the internal stress given by eq exceeds the crack closure pressure with increasing temperature thermal cracks form and further increase of temperature provides the surface energy required for the propagation of the initiated crack zuo et al..
this results in alteration of the grain tograin contacts in the rock matrix which leads to reduced cohesion at higher temperatures..
in the case of the variation of friction angle with increasing temperature the granite friction angle appears to remain steady up to around and then slightly increases with increasing temperature at and respectively..
the friction between grain to grain contacts may be altered by the thermally induced micro structural modifications..
however this effect on grain contact is expected to be smaller at relatively low temperatures resulting in relatively steady friction angle with increasing temperature at lower temperatures..
however slight ments non linearity must be taken into account..
in addition to the confinement according to this study increasing temperature also alters the failure envelope of granite..
an initial increment in deviatoric stress with increasing temperature can be observed up to and further increase of temperature to causes it to be slightly reduced..
the temperature dependent shear parameters of granite were investigated next and the shear parameters can be obtained from the mohr coulomb failure envelope..
as suggested by singh et al..
the mohr coulomb parameters cohesion and friction angle were calculated using eq..
taking into account the linear region of the obtained mohr coulomb failure envelope considering only smaller confining stresses up to mpa for each temperature condition to obtain the temperature dependent shear strength parameters..
sin where and and are cohesion and friction angle respectively..
are major principal stress and minor principal stress according to cohesion increases from to mpa with increasing temperature from room temperature to and further increases of temperature up to and cause the granite cohesion to be reduced to mpa and mpa respectively..
the observed cohesion gain at relatively low temperatures confirms that thermally induced rock matrix expansion induces greater mutual attraction among individual minerals..
this is also influenced by the inhibition of micro crack propagation at relatively low temperatures..
cumulative ae events vs axial stress at different pressures and temperatures..
continued enhancement in friction angle with increasing temperature can be seen probably due to the increased resistance of mineral particles to external deformation as result of the thermally induced energy in the mineral particles..
however compared with cohesion the temperature dependency on friction angle is relatively insignificant within the temperature region considered here..
initial enhancement in shear parameters in sandstone with increasing temperature has been observed by zhang et al..
at relatively low temperature regions and these researchers observed reduction in friction angle from to and an increment in cohesion from mpa to mpa with increasing temperature from to further bauer and johnson observed around reduction in cohesion and reduction in friction angle in westerly granite with increasing temperature from room temperature to and friedman et al..
observed reduction in cohesion and reduction in friction angle with increasing temperature from room temperature to and respectively..
however the variation of shear strength parameters with increasing temperature at relatively low temperatures was not considered in the above studies..
the observed initial shear strengthening may be due to the inhibition of micro crack propagation by the plasticity mechanism which occurs at crack tips duclos and paquet at low temperatures..
with further increment of temperature the reduction of shear strength parameters can be expected due to the thermal weakening of the rock micro structure..
furthermore according to the sem studies conducted by zuo et al..
large local plastic deformations and extremely rough cleavage fractures occur at relatively low temperatures..
moreover due to the volume expansion the distance between the interfaces of the individual minerals decreases with the enhancement of their mutual attraction and the strength of the bonds increases..
both of these phenomena can be considered to explain the stress strengthening of granite under relatively low temperatures when subjected to confining pressures..
analysis of fracturing behaviour using ae technology acoustic emission ae detection technology is powerful nondestructive tool to study crack propagation processes in brittle materials including the stages of crack initiation growth and crack damage lockner..
when brittle material is under stress strain energy is released during the development of new cracks or the widening of existing cracks..
this energy is released in the form of elastic stress waves from the crack tips and can be captured and amplified by an ae system..
ae detection technology has therefore been widely used in number of previous studies to understand the crack development mechanism in brittle materials..
by incorporating the crack propagation pattern into the stressstrain relationship of the cracking material the crack development process can be divided into several stages..
hoek and bieniawski divided crack formation into five main crack closure crack initiation secondary cracking crack coalescence and crack damage..
incorporated stress strain curves into cumulative ae energy and strain plots..
in the crack propagation process with the gradual increment of loading on brittle materials most pre existing cracks are first closed releasing an insignificant number of ae counts..
this initial crack closure period is followed by the stable crack propagation period which can be identified by the release of gradual ae energy increments..
further increment of loading causes an exponential increase in ae energy indicating an unstable crack propagation period with failure approaching..
the crack closure threshold cc is defined as the stress threshold at which the initial ae counts are identified..
anan initial increment in cumulative ae..
counts can be seen at the crack initiation ci threshold and the cumulative ae counts starts exponential growth at the crack damage cd threshold..
the region between the crack closure threshold and the crack initiation threshold is generally defined as the stable crack closure region where linear elastic deformation occurs..
the region between the crack initiation threshold and the crack damage threshold is defined as the stable crack propagation region and the region between the crack damage threshold and sample failure is identified as the unstable crack propagation region..
the application of compressive loading fails rocks through either shear localization brittle regime or cataclastic flow and the surrounding conditions such as temperatures and pressures may cause homogenous plastic flow..
according to existing studies axial intra granular cracking and shear rupturing of cemented grain contacts can be observed before failure in brittle regimes and grain crushing and pore collapse can be identified before failure in cataclastic flow regimes..
according to wong et al..
the development of local stress concentrations leads to the initiation of many intra granular micro cracks in the rock mass and the crack density increases with increasing deviatoric stress and tends to merge on reaching the peak stress resulting in strain softening and shear localization..
these damage processes are clearly identified by the intense ae activities in the field..
ae technology was therefore used to investigate the progressive fracturing behaviour in strathbogie granite under tri axial conditions..
illustrates the cumulative ae events with axial stress at various pressures and temperatures for the tested specimens..
the corresponding variations of deviatoric stress against strain are also included in the same plots to identify the stress thresholds for crack closure crack initiation and crack damage..
the very high ae counts in strathbogie granite at dilatancy in the pre failure stage are due to the fact that ae waves generate when the local shear stress concentration at grain contact is sufficiently high to rupture the grain boundaries and frictional slips and grain rotations may occur once the grain contacts have lost their cohesion..
in the present study crack threshold ratios were defined to identify the temperature and pressure dependent crack propagation in the tested granite as follows and shows the crack propagation stress threshold ratios of granite specimens tested at various confining pressures and temperatures..
crack closure stress threshold deviatoric stress at crack closure stress deviatoric stress at failure cc crack initiation stress threshold deviatoric stress at crack initiation stress deviatoric stress at failure ci crack damage stress threshold deviatoric stress at crack damage stress cd deviatoric stress at failure according to the results the beginning of crack damage occurs at earlier stages of deviatoric loading for higher confining pressures..
however the crack damage stress increases with increasing confinement due to the influence of confining pressure on thermal crack development and the suppression of the widening of existing micro cracks..
according to in the temperature range considered here three tendencies can be identified with increasing confining increase of the elastic deformation region decrease of the stable crack propagation region and increase of the unstable crack propagation region..
the crack initiation stress threshold also progressively increases with increasing confining pressure which can be attributed to the fact that the brittle behaviour of rock specimens at lower confining pressures changes to quasi brittle behaviour with increasing confining pressure..
this is because the suppression of micro crack development is less at low confining pressures and therefore sudden failures mostly occur and the beginning of crack initiation occurs at earlier stages of deviatoric loading at high confining pressures due to the higher normal stress acting on micro cracks resulting in limited progression of cracking before failure..
in relation to the temperature effect increasing the temperature causes an initial increment in the crack propagation stress threshold followed by slight reduction for all the temperature conditions considered..
for example at mpa confinement the crack damage stress threshold ratios increased by around with increasing temperature from room temperature to and respectively and reduced by around when the temperature increased to this implies that at low temperatures suppressed micro crack development mechanism is dominant and increasing the temperature causes crack damage to occur at earlier loading stages..
interestingly at mpa confinement the crack damage stress threshold ratio increased by around with increasing temperature from room to and respectively..
this exhibits the cumulative effect of temperature and pressure micro crack development in the rock mass..
at relatively low temperatures micro crack propagation may be inhibited by the thermally induced plasticity mechanism which occurs at crack tips and the increased bonding strength through thermally induced rock matrix expansion which increases crack stress thresholds..
however further increase of temperature creates thermally induced cracks and causes the grain boundary cracks to widen resulting in early crack damage..
further with the influence of confinement micro crack development is suppressed causing relatively low increment of crack damage stress threshold ratios at higher confinements..
corresponding alterations in granite micro structure comprehensive micro structural analysis was also performed to identify the interior correspondences of the above described temperature dependent mechanical behaviour of granite sem and optical microscopic analyses were performed on thin sections of granite specimens at various room temperature pre heated to and..
these temperatures were selected to identify the microstructural behaviour at at which the highest strength increment was observed and at which clear thermally induced rock mass weakening was observed..
specimen at room temperature was used as control..
based on optical microscope imaging mineralogical assembling in the granite specimen could be identified by the colour and texture of each of the mineral assemblages..
further detailed sem study was performed using scanning electron imaging sei and bsei back scatter electron imaging bsei techniques..
bsei images taken at low magnifications clearly show different mineral assemblages and grain boundaries see..
using energy dispersive ray edx technology with aztec oxford instruments chemical component mapping was generated in each specimen and each mineral was identified qualitatively..
the bright colour images observed in edx images indicate higher concentration higher energy dispersion while dark colour areas indicate lower concentration lower energy dispersion..
based on the spectrum of each point point id the corresponding mineral was identified and map spectrum provided overall elements available for each specimen..
according to and there are clear mineralogical assembling in the granite specimens mainly with quartz kfeldspar and plagioclase..
the heating of granite up to temperature has not caused any significant thermally induced micro cracks in addition to the pre existing faults and grain boundaries and almost all grain boundaries remain intact..
however further heating of granite to the higher temperature of caused the induction of some micro cracks mainly along..
stress thresholds for different fracturing stages..
temperature confining pressure mpa deviatoric stress at failure mpa crack closure threshold cc mpa crack initiation threshold ci mpa crack damage threshold cd mpa..
crack propagation stress threshold ratios of granite specimens tested at various confining pressures and temperatures..
the quartz and feldspar minerals intra granular cracks and the quartz feldspar grain boundaries inter granular cracks..
some grain boundary cracks running along grain boundaries and around pore boundaries could be identified..
considerable number of cracks were propagated after at triple junctions dominantly in quartz feldspar boundaries..
optical microscopic and sem images of thin sections of strathbogie granite at room pre heated to pre heated to boundaries have been partially parted and significant number of grain boundaries appear to remain intact up to this temperature..
furthermore based on the edx mapping it was confirmed that intra granular cracks are mainly initiated along the feldspar and quartz minerals..
intragranular cracks were mainly observed in larger crystals and smaller crystals remained un parted even at for strathbogie granite thermally induced intra granular micro cracks seem to play significant role at relatively low temperatures probably due to the presence of relatively high feldspar and biotite contents..
similar observations have been reported in bauer and johnson study conducted for charcoal granite where intra granular microcracks predominantly occur compared to grain boundary cracks..
the sem analysis is also consistent with this finding which exhibits inhibition of micro crack development followed by micro cracking at relatively high temperatures..
the crack propagation process in any rock mass is largely influenced by the mineralogical composition because cracks normally propagate through weaker planes of the rock mass..
since granite is an igneous type of rock two main types of thermallyinduced cracking modes can be inter granular and intragranular..
the amount of inter granular or intra granular cracking is dependent on the stress state rock type and mineralogy of the rock mass..
inter granular cracks occur along grain boundaries pre existing faults and micro cracks of the rock while intragranular cracks occur through weaker mineralogical constituents..
for example feldspar and biotite are weaker mineralogical constituents due to their large crystals mm as crystals greater than mm in size are generally defined as weaker mineralogical constituents compared to equi dimensional small crystals like quartz homand etienne and houpert..
based on experimental results intra granular cracking is highly temperature dependent due to the temperature dependent dislocations in the rocks..
this is because different mineralogical components have different thermo elastic moduli and thermal conductivities..
these observations suggest that micro cracking in granite is highly temperature dependent as evidenced by the previously observed initial strength gain followed by slight strength reduction with increasing temperature in the tested granite..
however this shows that granite needs to be heated to sufficient temperature to cause thermal cracks in it and therefore heating to lower temperature may only cause strength gain through the thermal expansion of the rock matrix..
this is consistent with the results of bauer and johnson..
the mechanical properties of charcoal granite in their study remained relatively steady until and westerly granite exhibited significant thermal dependency even at relatively low temperatures..
in homand etienne and houpert study the variation of uni axial compressive strength of both semones and remiremont granites is insignificant until followed by significant reductions at higher temperatures..
these results indicate the dependency of mineralogical composition and grain size distribution on the temperature dependent mechanical behaviour in various types of granites..
bse images of strathbogie granite with edx thin section at room thin section pre heated to..
conclusions series of tri axial strength tests was conducted on australian strathbogie granite under four different confining pressures and four different temperatures rt simulating various geothermal reservoir conditions..
the following conclusions can be mechanical behaviour of the tested granite is influenced by both reservoir depth and temperature and the depth effect is much greater than the temperature effect..
granite located at relatively smaller depths appears to fail through shear localization and increasing depth may cause this to change to ductile failure through strain hardening..
progressive enhancement in stress threshold with increasing confining pressure is observed in strathbogie granite..
such behaviours exhibit greater strength and lower brittle characteristics in granite located at greater depths..
increasing of temperature causes granite strength to be enhanced up to certain temperature around for strathbogie granite through the possible thermal expansion of the rock matrix and further increasing of temperature may cause it to weaken by inducing thermal cracks..
this was confirmed by the micro structural analysis which did not reveal any noticeable amount of thermally induced micro cracking in strathbogie granite up to and heating of the granite to greater temperature as caused many intra granular cracks in quartz and feldspar and some grain boundary cracks between quartz and feldspar minerals..
furthermore according to ae analysis increasing the temperature first causes the crack propagation stress threshold to increase and further increasing of the temperature causes it to be slightly reduced..
this indicates suppression of micro cracks at low temperatures by matrix expansion and the development of micro cracks through thermally induced damage at higher temperatures..
finally an attempt was made to improve the conventional mohrcoulomb failure criteria for geothermal reservoirs with extreme pressures and temperatures because the conventional criteria are not applicable to extreme conditions..
acknowledgements this research project is funded by the australian research council arc and the authors would like to thank all the deep earth energy laboratory staff at monash university clayton campus australia and the monash centre for electron microscopy mcem who dedicated their time and energy to bring this experimental series to successful conclusion..
the sixth author extends his appreciation to the deanship of scientific research at king saud university saudi arabia for funding the work through the international research group project no..
introduction seismic structural information can be used more effectively if correlation can be made be tween seismic refraction velocities and labora tory measurements of velocities of rocks repre sentative of the geological section of the area..
the correlation will be more meaningful if the laboratory measurements on the rocks are car ried out at pressures equal to their in situ pres sures..
during recent cruises to the mid atlantic ridge near over specimens were collected at dredge stations on the slopes of seamounts aumento aumento and providing extensive coverage from km east to km west of the axis of the ridge..
in addition detailed picture of the velocity of crustal layers was obtained from the seismic refraction pro files whose locations are shown in..
the crustal section consists of five dis crete apparently continuous layers with range of velocities from to bedford institute contribution no..
canadian journal of earth sciences underlain by normal mantle velocity of the whole crustal thickness ranges from km..
number of continuous seismic reflection profiles were obtained in the area extending westward from the median valley for approxi mately km..
the latter showed an increase in the thickness of unconsolidated sediment with distance from the median valley..
the steep and abrupt slopes in basement suggest that many of the seamounts are block faulted features and one can infer that it may be possible to sample at least the upper km of the geological section by dredging the slopes of seamounts at various elevations..
regional geological picture may thus be in ferred by correlating the resultant velocities measured in the laboratory with the seismic re fraction velocities and structure..
in addition to the specimens from the dredge hauls and the seismic information detailed bathymetric gravimetric and total magnetic field surveys were made over the whole area shown in..
it was shown that the can..
sci downloaded from www nrcresearchpress com by concordia univ on personal use only canadian journal of earth sciences..
schematic bathymetry of the area at showing the major morphological the locations of the sampling stations solid dots sonobuoy refraction profiles using explosives solid lines and two ship refraction profiles using an airgun broken lines are superimposed..
residual bouguer gravity anomaly persists re gardless of the choice of single replacement density suggesting geological inhomogeneities within the area..
density measurements for the geological section sanlpled and the correlated seismic information will undoubtedly improve the quality of the bouguer map and provide more information on the deepest crustal layer and upper mantle..
paper gives compressional wave veloci ties at pressures in excess of of representative suite of rock samples from the mid atlantic ridge at the locations shown in velocity as function of pressure is fig..
discussed for the various rock types and veloc ity versus density of the samples is compared with the empirical curves derived from the laboratory measurement of velocities by other workers..
evidence for layering and block fault ing in the area is presented to show that the dredge material is representative of the geo logical section..
weathering were obtained from the area near in selecting specimens for the velocity measurement an attempt was made to cover the spectrum of these properties..
brief pelro graphic description of the specimens studied is given in table the degree of porosity and weathering is also indicated as are the lengths densities and veiocities at in situ lithostatic pressures of the cores studied..
the associated range of densities is indicative of wide range of velocities in the rock suite..
complete petro graphic and chemical descriptions of these rocks together with observed variations with topography have been reported elsewhere..
curves indicating the variation in velocity with pressure for all samples are presented in..
no correction has been made for the change of length of the specimen under pres sure..
the error in velocity due to the latter is less than few parts per thousand at the high est dressure and can therefore be various rock types with differing degrees of neglected..
similarly the change in density at the highest pressure is small and may be..
sample descriptions porosity and metamorphism hydration appendix for experimental procedure..
the velocities of most of the samples rise can..
sci downloaded from www nrcresearchpress com by concordia univ on personal use only and mid atlantic ridge near..
xi table petrographic description density length and velocity at in situ pressure of cores drilled from the dredged rock sample from the mid atlantic ridge specimen no..
description density length cm kmls massive gabbro showing incipient alteration to fine grained gabbro showing incipient alteration to greenstone greens tone greenstone greenstone fresh zenocrystic basalt very fresh massive zenocrystic basalt fresh basalt fresh fine grained basalt vesicular pillow basalt vesicular pillow basalt fresh serpentinized gabbro partially weathered basalt with secondary veins weathered basalt showing incipient alteration to greens tone weathered basalt partially weathered serpentinized peridotite partially weathered serpentinized peridotite partially weathered serpentinized peridotite fresh basalt possibly erratic amphibolite possibly erratic sharply as the pressure is increased from atmo spheric to about..
this may reflect the fact that most of the samples were collected in depth of water where the hydrostatic pressure approximates this value..
also in many cases sharp increase in velocity with pressure occurs near the in situ hydrostatic pressure shown in..
it was observed that many of the samples had microscopic fractures that prob ably developed when the rocks were relieved of their hydrostatic head upon recovery..
in fact the glassy margins of some of the fresher more porous rocks exploded on the ship deck..
the highest velocities measured at in situ pressures are characteristic of the metamorphosed basic rocks the highest values being those of showing incipi ent alteration to..
this can be seen more clearly in plot velocity at in situ pressure versus density..
the velocities of the metabasalts are slightly lower than the metagabbros although both rock types have been altered to of similar densities..
the in situ velocities of all the fresh massive basalts are very similar with mean average of about the density differences between all the basalts and meta basalts are negligible..
wide spread in the velo cities and densities crustal depth..
under brn of far oenh lkml under hrn rater..
experimental relationship between compres sional wave velocity and pressure for all the core samples..
equivalent crustal depths are calculated using an average rock density of and assuming depth of water of km..
sci downloaded from www nrcresearchpress com by concordia univ on personal use only canadian journal of earth sciences..
fresh basalt vesicular basalt serpentinit..
weathered nafe and drake in talwoni sultan and worzel..
experimental relationship between com pressional wave velocity at in situ lithostatic pres sures and density for all core samples..
empirical curves published by others are presented for com parison..
the two samples of possible erratic origin have not been plotted..
to of pillow basalts is evident from the two samples measured..
the velocities in these rocks undoubtedly vary widely with the degree of vesicularity and subsequent in filling of vesicles by zeolites..
the measured density and velocity of fresh serpentinite were lower than those of the fresh basalts and meta basalts..
the remainder of the material showed varying degrees of weathering and associated low velocities and densities..
also includes curves showing the relation of compressional wave velocity to density from the results published by woollard and nafe and drake in talwani et al..
it is evident that all the basalts and metabasalts have significantly lower velocity to density ratio than either of the two curves..
however these lower velocities are consistent with the refraction seismic results of keen and..
evidence for layering and block faulting as pointed out earlier if it can be shown that the seamounts comprising the mid atlantic ridge are large uplifted blocks of an originally uniformly stratified flat lying volcanic se quence then the slopes of the seamounts pro vide an exposed from which slmples can be obtained..
the steep and abrupt slopes observed are not inconsistent with the above suggestion..
further keen showed from continuous seismic profiling that the evidence for near vertical block faulting from basement topography underlying the sedi mentary cover is even more convincing than that from bottom topography..
if block faulting of systematically layered crust has occurred then one might expect that the rock type found at given depth below the top of seamount would be the same as that found at equal all over the area how ever using the dredging technique there are two factors which may coniplicrtte an examina tion of the above concept first of all the dredge material is collected over range of depths and therefore may sample more than one layer..
also some of the material coliected could have rolled down from hisher elevations..
therefore to assess this concept we must only consider the maximum depths of the dredge hauls below the tops of the seamounts as function of the type of material collected..
demonstrates that certain rock types are found within discrete range oaf depths the abscissa represents the number of dredge hauls containing particular rock type whose is greater than given depth the ordinate..
this number has been normalized by dividing by the total number of dredge hauls containing the same rock type and converting to percentage..
shows that vesicular basalt most frequently occurs near the tops of seamounts whereas the metamorphics form the deepest part of the section..
the mas sive basalts are most commonly found to lie between the vesicular basalt and the metamor it should be noted that the separation of these curves will be less obvious if the layering is not horizontal with respect to the plane of zero depth to obtain the best layered model the ranges of depth is shown as function of distance from the axis of the ridge in..
sci downloaded from www nrcresearchpress com by concordia univ on personal use only and mid atlantic ridge near..
stations containing vesicular basalts stations containing massive metamorphosed lp out the crustal section..
it is thus suggested that these rocks are local diapiric intrusive masses and do not outcrop as undisturbed sections of the layered ultramafic bodies..
apparent thinning of the uppermost vesicu lar basalt layer with increasing distance from the axis is consistent with the ocean floor spreading hypothesis..
longer periods of weathering and erosion of the older rocks would explain the observed thinning of the uppermost layer and also would contribute more sedimentary material at greater distances from the ridge axis as observed by keen and manchester..
while the details of the seismic refraction results will not be discussed here the velocities and thicknesses of layers agree well with the model presented in..
on all profiles shot in areas of low relief layer with thickness of about km was underlain by layer with range of velocity of to this provides further evidence to support the systematically layered and block faulted model..
summary the observations can be summarized as follows there is considerable evidence to show that near vertical keen block faulting is responsible for much of the topographic relief near the axis of the mid atlantic ridge..
this implies that at least km of the geological section is represented in the dredge material..
the consistence of rock type in the material dredged from given depth below the tops of seamounts is indica tive of systematically layered crust prior to these major vertical move ments..
thins with the uppermost vesicular pillow basalt layer increasing distance from the axis..
we attribute this to mechanical and chemical denudation from the tops of seamounts..
the massive basalt layer apparently thins with increasing distance from the axis..
as result of and there is an apparent progressive shallowing of the metamorphosed basalt and gabbro layer away from the axis of the ridge..
depth below top of seamount..
plot of the number of dredge hauls containing particular rock type whose is greater than given depth the ordinate divided by the total number of dredge hauls containing the same rock type nt..
types collected at each station are placed with in the range of depth to obtain smooth hori zons..
the most striking feature of is the consistent occurrence of metamorphosed bas in those stations whose depth are greater than km and their absence at lesser depths..
it is therefore proposed that these basalts and now and once formed semi continuous layers prior to block faulting and that meta morphism to the greenschist facies occurred at burial depths of about km..
above this hori zon basalts are common to most of the dredge hauls and apparently outline layer of about km in thickness..
shallower depths yield mostly vesicular pillow basalts some with zeolitic replacement..
on both the crest moun tains and high fractured plateau volcanic agglomerates are common at all depths..
neglecting the weathered vesicular basalt rocks the layering shown in can be in ferred without considering that some of the material came from higher elevations that is all of the rocks collected could have been in situ..
serpentinites however occur at all ele vations and are randomly distributed through can..
sci downloaded from www nrcresearchpress com by concordia univ on personal use only..
ae ia canadian journal of earth sciences..
vesicular basalt metamorphosed basalts serpentinite range of elevation of dredge haul..
western high fractured plateau western crest..
med valley eastern crest distance km eastern high fractured plateau..
plot of the range of depth below the top of the seamount for all dredge samples against distance from the ridge axis..
the rock types are plotted within the range of depth of the dredge haul to demonstrate probable layering of the crust prior to block faulting..
the average compressional wave velocity of basalt and meta gabbro increases for these rocks in the order given..
basalt velocities compare layer two as favorably with that of given by and it is sus pected that the metamorphic rocks of higher grade when at greater depths than those observed here will exhibit velocities comparable to that of layer three..
the velocity density ratio for this rock sequence is somewhat lower than that of other similar sequences in other areas..
wide range of velocities and densities are observed in the pillow basalts de pending upon the degree of vesicularity and amount of vesicle infilling..
the occurrence of serpentinites is ran dom and unrelated to depth below the tops of seamounts..
also the velocity of fresh serpentinite is relatively low and it is extremely unlikely that this material comprises deeper higher velocity layer such as oceanic crustal layer three..
the presence of serpentin ites as hydrated diapiric intnrsives along planes of weakness as pointed out by and and seems plausible..
in conclusion we have demonstrated that systenlatically layered crust each layer with its associated velocity density and degree of metamorphism existed on the crest and high fractured plateau of the mid atlantic ridge prior to major vertical block faulting..
these results should provide good model from which gravity data might be used to study the deeper crustal structure on regional basis..
probable intrusions of serpentinites with low velocity and density are the only anomalies in the simple layered interpretation..
in addition because of the relative non magnetic properties the metamorphosed rocks and the observed thickness of the basalt layer any structure on the metamorphic hori can..
sci downloaded from www nrcresearchpress com by concordia univ on personal use only..
and mid atlantic ridge near xi zon will be an important source of magnetic anomaly..
keywords permeable faults hydrogeology fluid flow geothermal field management reservoir engineering pressure drop introduction geothermal energy is an essential component to supply requires developing new it future energy demands..
geothermal sites and improving the performance of existing systems to satisfy continuously growing demand..
the productivity of geothermal field mainly depends on subsurface fluid flow which in active tectonic regions is controlled by permeability of fault zones..
in that frame the primary focus is on locating and characterizing faulted areas in geothermal fields..
this study employs numerical modeling to allocate and quantify permeability anisotropies and discontinuities faults in order to understand their influence on subsurface fluid flow in geothermal reservoirs..
numerical models have been increasingly used to understand the setup and productivity of geothermal systems..
general overview of geothermal models has been given by..
additionally there are several sites exemplifying similar characteristics as in lahendong..
the underground movement of hot and cold fluids has been modeled for geothermal fields in new zealand..
the kakkonda geothermal site consists of two reservoirs at various depths with different fluid properties..
there results from fluid flow analysis show the importance of fractures for fluid transport enhancing the recharge or discharge in the reservoir page of environ earth sci..
generally faults acting as preferential fluid path ways significantly change the pressure and temperature field in the reservoir..
models for the seferihisar balc ova field focus on the fluid flow inside of faults..
results show an enhanced upward heat transport through fluids from bottom of the geothermal system..
our test ground is the lahendong geothermal field located in sulawesi indonesia..
the field is owned and operated by pertamina geothermal energy and hosts power plant with production capacity of mwe..
there geothermal exploration started in the early including geophysical and geohydrochemical approaches..
it is water dominated magmatic structurally controlled system..
faults generally act as across fault fluid barriers and alongfault fluid conductors..
as result hot springs mainly appear on the top of vertically permeable faults at the surface..
available numerous drilling and surface measurements allowed detailed characterization of the geological and hydrogeological setting of the area..
the model presented here is developed for investigating subsurface fluid flow and the permeability distribution including the fault zones in the lahendong geothermal field..
below the geological structure of the field is presented followed by an introduction to the modeling approach..
detailed investigation of subsurface permeability distribution is crucial step for site selection and smart drilling strategies..
the numerical simulations presented will provide insight into understanding the subsurface fluid flow considering the hydraulic conductivity of faults..
it ensures productive as well as sustainable operation of geothermal fields avoiding risks such as drilling into non fractured or cold zones and targeting highly corroding waters..
although the target area is lahendong the general workflow is applicable for other geothermal sites consisting of similar constraints..
reservoir characterization hydrogeology the overall driving force for the fluid flow is the sw ne oriented natural hydraulic gradient in the lahendong geothermal system..
the direction of fluid flow varies through the geothermal site due to horizontal partitioning of the reservoir by relatively less permeable fault zones..
the basic sections are located in the topographic map of the study area with geological features water and rock sample locations and model cross section environ earth sci page of south in the east and beneath lake linau..
beneath lake linau the direction of fluid flow is slightly rotated to wsw ene..
also types of fluid change from one section to another an acidic highly saline type beneath lake linau and neutral low saline type south and east of lake linau..
the impermeable structure across faults prevent the fluids from diluting each other..
however faults are rather permeable along the vertical axis which allows recharge of the system through the faults..
rainwater infiltrates at fault in the sw at mt lengkoan and creek water infiltrates into the normal faults at lake linau..
the hydrothermal system discharges into lake linau and toward the ne as driven by the hydraulic gradient..
the fracture network along the area is characterized by strike slip faults and normal faults..
the sinistral faults strike and steeply dip toward the se left step over on the strike slip faults forms an extension basin in the central study area..
normal faults at the extension basin strike nw and dip beneath lake linau..
lithology lahendong area is mainly characterized by pre postand tondano formation of pleistocene age..
the rocks are typically andesite volcanic breccia and tuff..
those types have been sampled from borehole cores and used to determine porosity permeability and thermal conductivity..
effective porosity and matrix permeability have been analyzed using cylindrical shaped specimen with dimension of cm cm cm oriented parallel to the coring..
thermal conductivity has been measured on plain sections of dried cores..
the experimental setup consists of gas permeameter for determining matrix permeability of an helium pycnometry for effective porosity measurements johnson and of an optical scanner for thermal conductivity measurements..
these parameters have been measured and averaged for the three rock types..
andesite has an effective porosity of permeability of and thermal conductivity of dry or saturated..
tuff has porosity of but the lowest permeability of of saturated..
volcanic breccia is permeable layer with an effective porosity of permeability of and thermal conductivity of dry or saturated..
reservoir rocks reflect generally low matrix permeability suggesting fracture controlled fluid flow throughout the aquifer..
and dry or conductivity thermal model setup model geometry numerical models developed for the study area represent the initial conditions of the reservoir before production or the commercial finite injection start..
for simulation cross section of the modeled area with geological structure boundary conditions and location of observation points page of environ earth sci thermal and hydraulic parameters of the lahendong reservoir rocks measured in laboratory sample name depth rock type effective porosity thermal conductivity dry thermal conductivity saturated matrix permeability..
andesite breccia tuff element software feflow is used to model pressuredriven and thermally induced fluid flow including viscosity changes..
governing equations for fluid flow and heat transport in saturated porous media are derived from conservation principles of linear momentum mass and energy..
details on the software and the parameterization can be found in diersch..
the model geometry is vertical sw ne trending cross section extending km in horizontal and km in vertical direction..
the direction of the profile has been selected to cover all relevant processes in the lahendong geothermal it cuts major faults and the production and injection wells which are used for temperature and pressure calibration..
furthermore to the groundwater flow direction showing major fluid flow activities..
the homogeneous and isotropic geological layers in the model are stratified nearly horizontally..
faults in the middle of the model striking perpendicular to the cross section dip with toward cooling pluton beneath lake linau..
details on structural and geological components of the modeled region have been presented in..
is parallel it the numerical the mesh used for simulation in feflow consists of nodes and elements that are denser surrounding the faults because of expected gradients due to parameter contrasts..
material properties of elements are permeability porosity and thermal conductivity and set according to laboratory measurements..
however properties of the faults and lake linau are slightly adapted to specific conditions..
the definitions for the modeled grids along the faults are as porosity is and thermal conductivity is..
corresponding grids for lake linau are defined by porosity of and thermal conductivity of..
the model simulates fluid flow and thermal transport in saturated media in steady state..
initial values and boundary conditions fluid flow boundary conditions in the model describe groundwater heads and recharge amounts..
the hydraulic head at the sw model boundary is and at the ne boundary..
the sw hydraulic head represents infiltration of surface water into fault striking perpendicular to the model..
hydraulic head at the ne border is adapted to borehole measurements in that area..
infiltration into the fault zones at lake linau is described by fluid flux boundary conditions..
the quantity is the sw and at the ne fault distributed over fault width..
groundwater recharge is set to mm at the ne top surface..
fluid movement in forthe model domain is constrained by no flow boundary at the bottom recharge through the surrounding fault zones and the low hydraulic heads in the ne model area..
discharge of the system in the central study area is mainly toward lake linau and across the ne model boundary..
initial hydraulic head for the whole model domain is the heat transport boundary conditions are time invariant fixed temperatures and heat flux..
is km at thermal gradient the sw model boundary and the temperature is constant at the pluton..
temperature of water infiltrating into faults and here mixing with shallow warm groundwater is while surface groundwater recharge is at temperature values are obtained from field and bore log measurements..
heat flux is set to mw at the bottom model boundary..
this value is fixed based on the studies from nagao and uyeda and..
initial temperature for the model domain is set as km according to the local thermal gradient..
permeability determination initial values for permeability are defined based on laboratory measurements..
after each simulation run modeled and measured temperature and pressure values have been compared at indicated observation points..
in case of poor matching errors permeability has been adjusted until satisfactory results have been achieved..
beneath lake linau simulation results showed locally strong discrepancies between modeled and measured pressure and temperature errors..
adjustment of permeability in geological infiltration rates into faults or hydraulic heads did not lead to acceptable results..
only the implementation of strong permeability anisotropy throughout whole depth an additional fault resulted in minimization of errors..
implementation has been accomplished by mesh adaptation to ensure appropriate behavior around the fault..
by this procedure permeability anisotropies have been located and characterized in detail throughout the model..
layers in general defining direction dependent permeability improves the data fit rather than using similar permeabilities in all directions..
this is probably due to the fractures increasing the permeability mostly in vertical direction..
porosity and thermal conductivity remained constant throughout simulation..
variation in porosity is negligible because it would directly be reflected in permeability while thermal conductivity differences would only affect conductive heat transport which is not dominant in the lahendong area..
measurementa ofmodel bottom boundary nemodel cdelisleetal nagaoanduyeda nebenetal bdwd hoeltingandcoldewey saghravanietal abrehmeetal materialproperties heatflux mwm measurementa measurementa logmeasurementa ckm measurementa elevationa measurementa nemodelsurface nefault coolingpluton lake swfault swmodelboundary temperature heattransport fluidflux ms hydraulichead fluidflow condition typeofboundary boundaryconditionspecificationsandrespectivereferencesofdatabase environ earth sci page of page of results numerical simulation is performed to obtain the best fit to the measured data changing the absolute and relative permeability in geological elements..
relative permeability refers to different permeabilities in horizontal and vertical direction..
as main result blind fault has been recognized beneath lake linau which has not been known from former studies..
simulated pressure and temperature are measured at five selected observation points which represent boreholes with available bore logs for pressure and temperature..
details on data are given in..
the model with best data fit out of different models is considered to generate the final model developed for lahendong..
permeability distribution and identification of blind fault distribution of permeability patterns in the reservoir has been conceived comparing temperature and pressure data in several wells..
especially beneath lake linau closely located wells show high variations in temperature and pressure..
drop of and bar along distance has been observed between well lhd and lhd..
models first showed high discrepancies between modeled and measured values in this area..
however after implementing another high anisotropic permeable structure between the observation points models resulted in satisfactory results..
the structure has ten times higher vertical environ earth sci permeability than horizontal permeability..
this structure is assumed to be another fault zone located between two known faults with vertical dip and nw strike..
this fault shows no trace at surface because it is covered by lake linau..
generally modeled permeability distribution in the lahendong reservoir is direction dependent and overprints the lithology..
modeled permeability is generally higher than measured ones in the order of up to four magnitudes..
this is due to fracture patterns which are not detectable at core sample scale..
permeability patterns directly affect subsurface fluid flow and temperature and pressure distribution..
permeability in the faulted zones and surroundings is lowest in the study area..
especially the middle and ne fault the shallow area beneath sw lake linau and the deep ne section of the ne fault show low permeabilities between and..
the area between the middle and ne fault the deep section ne of the sw fault the sw fault itself and the whole model area toward the sw and ne boundary show higher permeabilities of and..
permeability varies not only within the modeled area but also in vertical and horizontal direction..
in faults and the deep reservoir section in the ne permeability is by factor of higher in the vertical direction than in the horizontal direction..
in the areas between faults permeability is in some parts by factor of lower in the vertical direction..
in the rest of the model vertical and horizontal permeability do not differ..
final adapted permeability and anisotropy distribution throughout the model domain..
anisotropy shows the relation between vertical and horizontal permeability if anisotropy vertical permeability is higher than horizontal permeability environ earth sci..
page of modeled temperature and pressure distribution in the study area shows high pressure fields in the sw and convective heat transport with rising hot fluids and infiltration of cooler water through faults pressure distribution the pressure distribution in the study area is controlled by groundwater flow in low permeable rocks and vertically high permeable fault zones..
isobars drop following the natural hydraulic gradient from sw to ne..
the sw section of the system shows higher pressures which is caused by infiltration from higher elevations in the sw..
some wells existing in this region are of artesian type..
overpressure releases through high permeable zones beneath lake linau and discharges toward surface..
the pressure drop is up to bars across the faults..
temperature distribution temperature distribution along the lahendong geothermal reservoir suggests that convective heat transport is the dominating process in the reservoir rocks..
isotherms generally follow the sw ne oriented flow pattern the rise and the infiltration of fluids..
upwelling of isotherms between the faults verifies water rise toward lake linau..
infiltration of cold water causes down welling of isotherms particularly on the northeast section of the model..
temperature is locally increased at the bottom of the model surrounding the pluton..
subsurface fluid flow the absolute and vertical permeability distribution controls local fluid flow in the lahendong reservoir..
the general fluid flow driven by the natural pressure gradient is oriented from sw to ne vertical infiltration occurs at faults at lake linau and at the sw boundary..
discharge is across the ne model boundary..
the more detailed flow patterns can be observed with streamlines which show fluid flow along highly permeable areas..
calculated streamlines describe particle flow within the model domain..
forward calculation shows how infiltrating water at the sw model boundary distributes through the reservoir..
the backward calculation shows the source of fluid particles arriving at the ne model boundary..
patterns show that hot groundwater flows toward the faults beneath lake linau where the fluid flow is disturbed by rise in temperature and vertically high permeable layers..
this causes rise of groundwater in this model area red forward streamlines in..
at the same time cold water infiltrates into high permeable areas and distributes over the ne model domain blue backward streamlines in..
it is clearly seen that the composition of the ne reservoir domain is dominated by coldwater infiltration into faults while the production areas are characterized by hot water flow..
discussion investigation of subsurface fluid flow in geothermal reservoirs is crucial for sustainable exploitation avoiding drilling into less productive areas..
subsurface fluid flow might be locally influenced by fault zones or physical page of environ earth sci model domain with calculated streamlines in forward streamlines follow hydraulic gradient from sw model boundary towards ne in backward streamlines representing infiltrating cold water flowing towards ne model boundary properties of water viscosity..
the influence of these parameters on the fluid flow has been investigated in lahendong geothermal reservoir using hydraulic thermal simulations..
simulation results show the detailed permeability distribution in the reservoir including location of an additional fault zone..
matching of measured and simulated temperature and pressure has been used as tool for resolving the permeability distribution..
temperature and pressure have been iteratively determined at several observation points..
generally modeled values are in good agreement with observed ones..
nevertheless some observation points give slightly different values for both pressure and temperature lhd and lhd or only temperature lhd..
this is probably due to the complicated flow processes or strong small scale structural variation in fractured and faulted areas..
furthermore density variations which could have not been included into simulation due to high temperatures could cause variation of fluid pressure..
however the average deviation of simulated pressure and temperature is..
implemented model parameters are porosity permeability and heat conductivity..
from those parameters only permeability has been tested in specific range during simulation..
the influence of porosity and heat conductivity on fluid flow is negligible due to dominating convective heat flow..
values implemented in the model are based on measured permeabilities which represent matrix permeability of rocks..
the measured matrix permeability representing permeability in horizontal direction is on average which remains within typical permeability range for fractured igneous rocks..
permeability for volcanic breccias ranges typically between and and tuff permeabilities range between and..
in the wairakei geothermal field simulating the impermeable layers resulted in permeabilities of and in horizontal and vertical axis respectively..
however permeability in reservoir rocks might be locally increased due to fracture formation..
it might also be decreased due to alteration and sealing in faults..
in lahendong modeled permeability can be up to four magnitudes higher than measured ones in faulted areas..
this is caused by fractures which are not detectable in core scale..
moreover in fault cores it is by factor of higher in vertical direction than in horizontal direction..
however in areas between faults fault gauge permeability is in some parts by factor of lower in the vertical direction..
adaptation of permeability ensures fit to measured temperature and pressure data..
permeability in fractured areas is the main factor influencing subsurface fluid flow and temperature distribution in the lahendong reservoir area..
subsurface fluid flow is driven by local hydraulic heads which show high variations at different sections of the study area..
consequently convective heat distribution leads to high temperature variation along the reservoir..
these phenomena are observed in lahendong as well as comparable fields..
in new mexico water level drops of are observed..
high across several zones fault environ earth sci page of reservoir depth..
well name lhd lhd lhd lhd lhd..
below surface modelled pressure lhd lhd lhd lhd lhd well name date drilling completed date of bore log lhd lhd lhd lhd lhd oct jan may jul..
jul oct jul jul aug aug measured temeprature..
modelled pressure modeled versus measured temperature and pressure at selected observation points..
well specifications and measured data from temperature drops and upwelling of isotherms indicate that fault zones control the fluid flow in the lake long and valentine fields usa hooper..
the analysis of fluid the alpine fault new zealand pressure differences at allowed to characterize the change in permeability between hanging and footwall blocks..
in summary high pressure or temperature gradients are indicators for fluid barriers between observation points..
in other words reservoir sections of different properties are separated by horizontally less permeable faults..
in lahendong most significant fluid barriers are faults to the sw and to the ne of lake linau..
across these barriers the pressure drops up to bars..
similar pattern has been measured in bore logs beneath lake linau where no surface trace of fault had been observed in former studies..
however only by implementing another fault modeled and measured values could have been adapted..
the recently identified fault zone beneath lake linau remains under lake water and therefore is only traceable by this kind of reservoir modeling..
additionally to fault identification the internal structure of known fault zones has been understood in detail..
the ne fault shows displacement at km depth..
the detailed trend has been understood by permeability adaptation in this area..
due to low permeability in horizontal direction in the faults fluids propagate mostly vertically toward the hot springs at surface..
it also allows surface water to infiltrate into the reservoir in case the pressure within the fault zone is low enough..
this vertical fluid movement eventually controls the temperature distribution in the reservoir..
upward migration of deep hot water increases the temperature while infiltration of cold surface water causes local drop of temperature..
in summary the most important factors influencing the reliability of numerical reservoir models are absolute and different horizontal and vertical permeability..
however permeability adaptation has been done for each geological the vertical permeability anomalies are overprinting those layers and are constraining the regional groundwater flow..
those permeabilities of fractures directly influence the productivity of the reservoir..
therefore their permeability characteristics should be investigated in detail..
in previous study numerical model for the lahendong site has been set up in and aimed at forecasting the reservoir behavior during exploitation until the year..
with production of mwe it predicts pressure drop of bars..
however the forecast results are uncertain due to lack of measured pressure draw down data..
accordingly the next steps of the presented study should include realistic production and injection scenario in order reservoir to support exploitation..
furthermore chemical characteristics could be considered to achieve reliable production setups because hydrochemical processes play an important role in the lahendong reservoir..
presented models from this study provide important information on fluid flow in the water dominated lahendong reservoir..
the however additional two phase flow models of sustainable page of environ earth sci..
lahendong area are in progress to understand the influence of steam driven fluid flow in this high temperature system..
conclusion the primary focus of this study is to understand the influence of fault zones and permeability patterns on subsurface fluid flow in geothermal reservoirs..
the fluid flow mainly depends on rock and fault zone permeability..
these processes have been considered in numerical models which simulate local temperature and pressure conditions..
the initial reservoir conditions which refers to the case before production starts..
models are developed based on the conceptual models of the study area which explain reservoir geometry geological structures temperature and hydraulic conditions..
temperature and pressure well logs have been used for model calibration..
the numerical models represent vertical and horizontal fluid flow is mainly controlled by fault permeability..
this characteristic is used to simulate different reservoir sections and vertical fluid rise toward the surface..
by stepwise adaptation of permeability fields based on observed temperature and pressure gradients an additional blind fault zone can be identified beneath lake linau..
temperature and pressure significantly drop across that fluid barrier..
this behavior has been observed in comparable fields in the usa as well..
the overall shape of fluid flow direction trends in sw ne direction..
main recharge occurs by infiltration of surface water into the faults especially in the southwest and near to lake linau..
discharge is enhanced in highly fractured areas toward lake linau..
vertical permeability of faults allows fluids rising toward the hot springs at surface..
results show that permeability has to be considered for simulation of geothermal system..
the geothermal system is mainly controlled by fluid flow in faults depending on temperature and pressure conditions..
the locally modified fluid flow can considerably influence the productivity of geothermal field..
results also guide reservoir management in case of potential for field extension as performed in lahendong..
furthermore in southern africa seismic evidence suggests that the magmatism that resulted in the archean bushveld layered mafic intrusion also produced wholesale modification of the crustal and mantle lithosphere including the introduction of iron into clm during magmatism..
this demonstrates the significance of mafic magmatism in modifying the volume and composition of the lithosphere..
it has also been recognized that much of the lower continental crust worldwide is mafic in composition..
this leads to the by the eruption of sodic alkali basalts and tholeiitic basalts with end values as high as þ..
the lithospheric mantle is preserved however along the rift flanks where it undergoes conductive heating from the upwelling mantle and spawns low end volcanism..
this spatial and temporal pattern in the source of mafic magmatism along purethe rift is consistent with an overall shear model in which maximum crustal and mantle lithosphere extension are spatially coincident..
for lithospheric extension it has also been suggested that extension within the basin and range may be accommodated in some regions by simple shear in which case the regions of maximum crustal and mantle lithosphere thinning are significantly displaced from one another..
in this case the spatial temporal pattern of basalt chemical and isotopic composition might be quite different from the pure shear case with basalt forming along the axis of maximum crustal thinning and undergoing shift from lithosphere to sublithospheric source at later time than those found in off axis positions..
such displacement could account for the contemporaneous eruption of low end basalt in southern nevada and high end basalt in adjacent portions of owens valley to the west farmer four corners crust clm rift axis extension colorado upper mantle upwelling late cenozoic basalts nd..
nd nd longitude cartoon depicting late cenozoic pure shear extension of central rio grande rift northern new mexico and range of for late cenozoic basaltic rocks ultrapotassic alkali and tholeiitic composition along transect perpendicular to the rift axis..
thinning of mantle lithosphere beneath the rift axis triggers melting of upwelling asthenosphere producing sodic composition highend basaltic magmas while along the rift flanks potassic magmas are generated via conductive heating within preserved metasomatized portions of the pre extension clm..
continental basaltic rocksconcluding remarks question of whether the continents have been extensively underplated by mafic magmas or whether mafic lower crust represents an original characteristic of the continents..
investigations of this issue have largely involved studies of mafic lower crustal xenoliths entrained in younger basalts or ultramafic magmas and have included studies of both phanerozoic and precambrian lower crust..
perhaps the best evidence for phanerozoic underplating of the continental crust comes from mafic granulite facies xenoliths entrained in plio pleistocene basalts in north queensland australia..
here xenoliths show negative correlation between incompatible element content and..
furthermore the xenoliths end decreases and sr increases with decreasing..
both the trace element and isotopic data are consistent with the notion that the xenoliths represent cumulates from cenozoic basaltic magmas that intruded the lower crust and underwent concomitant fractional crystallization and crustal assimilation..
this example demonstrates that underplating of mafic magmas can occur but because xenoliths represent nonrepresentative and incomplete sampling of the lower crust it is not clear whether this underplating represents significant contribution to the overall mass of the continental crust in this region..
has potentially xenoliths of precambrian mafic lower crust have been studied in various locations worldwide such as the western united states northern europe and southern africa..
extracting unambiguous age and compositional information regarding the lower crust from these rocks is difficult because they were extracted from continental crust that undergone multiple episodes of high high temperature metamorphism partial melting and metasomatism..
as result it is not easy to decide whether these rocks represent mafic lithologies that were present in the lower crust at the time of crustal stabilization or whether they represent subsequently underplated material..
argue that plagioclase bearing garnet granulites entrained in devonian lamprophyres from the baltic shield represent solidified tholeiitic melts..
these authors suggest that the xenoliths represent portions of old lower crust emplaced during the development of large plume related late archean igneous province..
other authors have suggested that mantle plumes perhaps related to episodes of mantle overturn can produce significant crustal growth..
the chemical composition of lower is not always crustal xenoliths however consistent with an origin via underplating by plume related magmas..
many xenolith suites including those from the colorado plateau and the southern margin of the archean wyoming craton in the western united states have low nickel contents and high nb ratios as expected for arc related magmas or magmas that had interacted with the continental crust..
these rocks apparently represent mafic lower crust that formed at or near the time of crustal stabilization by subduction related magmas..
there is the possibility then that mafic lower crust of two general flavors exist one produced by subductionrelated processes at or near the time of crust formation and second with low nb ratios and higher nickel contents produced during plume related episodes of mafic magma underplating..
it remains for future studies to assess the validity of this suggestion and to determine the relative proportion of mafic lower crust formed by subductionand plume related processes..
concluding remarks considerable progress has been made during the past few decades in identifying the processes involved in the production of continental basaltic magmatism but some fundamental questions remain..
for example if the continental mantle lithosphere is source of continental magmatism how critical are mafic lithologies in clm to the production of such magmas and in controlling their chemical..
do reactions between ultramafic lithologies and partial melts of mafic lithologies produce the immediate sources of some continental basalts..
is metasomatism of the clm by fl melt derived from the sublithospheric mantle necessary immediate precursor to the production of not only kimberlites but also both sodic and potassic continental alkali..
does pervasively metasomatized mantle exist at the base or some other depth within the clm and if so what are its physical..
under what conditions can hydrated clm be preserved and under what circumstances does involved in such mantle get continental..
these questions do not just involve few details in an overall known picture of continental basaltic magma formation..
they represent the generation of these magmas..
the basic issue remains whether the geochemistry of continental basaltic rocks can distinguish rocks derived fundamental regarding issues continental basaltic rocks primarily from melting of the lithospheric mantle or from those derived primarily from the sublithospheric mantle..
complication discovered by recent studies is the increasing recognition that the lithospheric mantle is dynamic can change thickness through time and contains components of varying chemical and isotopic composition that were introduced at different times during the history of given segment of clm..
if better understanding of the sources of continental basaltic rocks can be achieved these rocks will provide additional insights into the evolution of the deep continental lithosphere..
introduction deep geological disposal has been the internationally accepted approach for the permanent disposal of high level radioactive waste hlw generated from nuclear power plants and other nuclear facilities..
an hlw repository can constructed in host rock at depth of several hundred meters below the ground surface..
the design of hlw repositories often relies on multi barrier system which typically consists of the natural geological barrier and an engineered barrier system..
as the last defense to the biosphere the natural geological barrier the host rock plays critical role in ensuring the long term safety of the hlw repositories..
because crystalline rocks such as granite and diorite have low permeability high solidity and good excavation stability they have been considered as potential hlw repository formations in some countries..
site selection for china hlw repository started in..
the efforts have been focused on potential hlw repository sites located within granite intrusions in mainland china..
since the beijing research corresponding author..
institute of uranium geology briug has performed site characterization studies in the beishan area china..
far the beishan area has been considered as the most potential candidate area for china hlw repository..
among all the engineering properties of crystalline rocks at potential hlw repository site the thermal conductivity is one of the most important parameters in design consideration because it has direct impact on the evaluation of the necessary repository volume and the optimization of the repository layout..
for instance in the swedish kbs concept for geological disposal of spent fuel copper canisters with cast iron inserts containing the spent fuel are surrounded bentonite for isolation and mechanical protection..
the heat generated the spent fuel will increase the temperature of all components of the repository..
for the bentonite buffer outside the canisters the peak temperature must not exceed..
this requirement implies that the canisters cannot deposited arbitrarily close to each other..
on the other hand unnecessarily large distances between the canisters will inefficient and costly use of the repository rock volume..
to fulfill the temperature requirement the rocks with low thermal conductivities..
lead to larger distance between canisters than for case with high thermal conductivities..
this is because the rocks with low thermal conductivities will give rise to higher temperatures in the bentonite..
hence to design and construct repositories successfully it is essential to perform an accurate assessment of the thermal conductivity characteristics of the host rock..
over the past few decades various experimental approaches have been employed to measure the thermal conductivity of rocks..
the results indicate that the thermal conductivity of rocks is closely associated with mineral composition porosity texture and density etc..
for crystalline rocks with relatively homogeneous texture and low porosity the mineral composition dominates the thermal conductivity..
in volcanic and sedimentary rocks the high variability of porosity in these rocks is major factor controlling the thermal conductivity..
for example increasing porosity which acts as barrier to the flow of heat often results in both lower wave velocity and lower thermal conductivity values..
for given rock water content and temperature have an influence on its thermal conductivity..
generally the thermal conductivity of the rock increases and decreases with increasing water content cho and and temperature birch and heuze vosteen and schellschmidt respectively..
moreover the effect of water saturation on the thermal conductivity of rocks shows generally increasing trend with increasing porosity..
given that the thermal conductivity of surrounding rocks around the excavations will changed the excavation induced stress some researchers studied the influence of pressure on the thermal conductivity of rocks..
one of the main findings achieved from these investigations shows that the thermal conductivity varies with the pressure exerted on the rock..
with increasing applied pressure the thermal conductivity starts to increase and subsequently the increase rate tends to constant value due to gradual closure of cracks and pores within the rock..
while the above mentioned studies provide meaningful insight into the thermal conductivity of various rocks the thermal conductivity characteristics of low porosity crystalline rocks subjected to different external factors such as water saturation temperature and compression stress have not been fully understood..
on the other hand the information on the thermal conductivity of rocks in potential hlw repository site must known with sufficient confidence to provide necessary input conditions for its long term safety assessment which is one of the motivations for this study..
in this work experimental investigations on the thermal conductivity of the beishan granitic rocks are conducted using the transient plane source tps method..
in the following discussion rock sampling and basic physical properties of the rock specimens are introduced first..
testing facilities and procedures are then described..
subsequently the water saturation temperature and compression stress dependent thermal conductivity characteristics of the tested rocks are evaluated comprehensively and finally some insights are obtained..
rock sampling and preparation the beishan area is situated in gansu province of northwestern china see..
after long geological evolution and weathering process the topography of this area is characterized and small gentle rolling hills with elevations ranging between and above the sea level..
the crust in this area possesses blocky structure with many granite intrusions see..
other surrounding rocks include mainly metamorphic and sedimentary rocks as well as quaternary cover..
rock sampling was carried out in the and xinchang rock blocks which are currently considered as two of the key investigation sub areas during site selection and characterization..
geographical location of the beishan area and photo showing its typical topography..
xinchang km granitic rock sedimentary rock metamorphic rock quaternary cover borehole fault..
rock sampling from six boreholes in the and xinchang sub areas for thermal conductivity measurements..
intact drill cores with diameter of approximately were taken from six sub vertical boreholes boreholes and in these two sub areas..
the borehole locations are presented in..
field observations indicated that the collected granitic rocks were relatively isotropic in texture and mineralogical composition..
to evaluate the geological nature of the rocks series of thin sections were prepared and then exposed to cross polarized light under an optical microscope to identify the dominant minerals in the rocks..
the percentages of the dominant minerals were determined point counting on thin sections..
for each thin section approximately points covering phenocrysts and groundmass were counted..
according to the quartz alkali feldspar plagioclase diagram streckeisen the rocks can further classified..
it can observed from that the rocks contain mainly moderate to low amount of quartz and alkali feldspar and moderate to high amount of plagioclase..
this means that the collected rocks dominantly range from granodiorite to..
for grain size characteristics the rocks are from fine grained to medium to coarse grained..
an overview of the basic information of the rocks is listed in..
based on the borehole no..
and sampling depth these rocks have been divided into eight groups..
total of pairs of rock specimens in diameter were prepared from the drill cores with length to diameter ratio of approximately..
in particular specimen ends were polished carefully using granodiorite ii ii..
classification of the eight rock groups based on modal analysis..
grinding machine until the flatness and roughness of the ends are less than and respectively..
the and polished specimen end surfaces minimize the thermal contact resistance during thermal conductivity measurement..
minimum of ten specimens for each rock group were prepared..
an introduction to the used tps method in the fields of geology and geophysics laboratory approaches to measuring soil and rock thermal conductivity can mainly divided into two steady state and transient state..
in this work the transient plane source tps method log and was utilized to measure the thermal conductivity of the specimens..
as one of the transient measurement methods the tps technique is based on the use of transiently heated plane sensor hot disk sensor and hot disk thermal constants analyser see..
the used hot disksystem can measure thermal conductivity of materials ranging from to..
the hot disk sensor consists of continuous double spiral which is etched out of thin nickel foil..
this spiral is sandwiched between two sheets of electrical insulation materials made of kapton..
the sensor acts both as heat source for increasing the temperature of the specimens and as dynamic temperature sensor for recording the temperature increase..
during the measurement the temperature in the sensor rises and heat starts to flow to the specimens..
the temperature rise in the sensor provides an indicator of the thermal properties of the specimens..
if the specimens have good thermal conducting properties the heat will transported rapidly inside the specimens..
on the contrary if the specimens have good thermal insulation properties the sensor temperature will rise faster and the heat will not transported as much as in the test of the good thermal conducting specimens..
compared with steady state measurement methods such as the divided bar beck and beck birch and the guarded hot plate one of significant advantages of the tps technique is that the thermal conductivity of materials can measured more quickly typically from several to tens of seconds..
hence long wait for thermal gradients to equilibrate is not required and the moisture migration in response to temperature gradients was minimized..
on the other hand unlike some transient methods such as thermal needle probes which are commonly used for soils and soft rocks the tps method can..
basic information and geological description of the tested rocks..
rock type and group basic information mineral composition naked eye observation photomicrograph of thin section borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain medium number of thin granodiorite xinchang borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain medium number of thin borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain fine to medium number of thin granodiorite borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain fine to medium number of thin xinchang borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain fine number of thin granodiorite xinchang borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain fine number of thin xinchang borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain coarse number of thin xinchang borehole no..
sampling number of specimen grain coarse easy to apply to hard geomaterials such as crystalline rocks..
it should noted that the tps method measures the thermal conductivity in contact manner which is different from non contact optical scanning measurements..
hence the thermal resistance between the specimen ends and the sensor exists..
far the tps technology has been widely used to tectonophysics temperature control systemhot disk thermal constants analyser sensor platen specimens specimens insulation material chamber sensor specimens oil bath sensor double spiral cable extension..
the hot disksystem used to measure the thermal conductivity of specimens under room temperature high temperature and uniaxial compression conditions..
hot disk sensor showing its key components..
determine the thermal properties of different materials..
theory of the tps technique to theoretically describe how the tps method behaves the thermal conductivity equation can solved assuming that the hot disk sensor consists of certain number of concentric ring heat sources located in an infinitely large sample..
constant electric power supplied to the sensor results in an increase in temperature which is directly related to the variation in the sensor resistance the tð þ..
where is the nickel electrical resistance in the beginning of the recording is the temperature coefficient of resistance of the nickel foil and is the value of temperature rise in the sensor due to constant current pulse given ð þ..
ð þ ð þ where is the total output of power from the sensor is the sensor radius is the thermal conductivity of the sample that is being tested and is dimensionless time dependent function according to eq..
and and plotted as function of provides linear relationship with slope that is function of and thermal conductivity can obtained fitting the experimental data to the straight line given eq thermal diffusivity is calculated from eq..
taking into account the value determined in the previous fit..
as mentioned above the solution of the thermal conductivity equation is based on the assumption that the hot disk sensor is located in an infinite material in perfect contact with the sensor surface..
this means that the heat flow generated from each measurement must not reach the outside boundaries of the specimen..
meanwhile careful preparation of specimen ends is required to minimize thermal contact resistance..
an estimation of how far the heat flow has proceeded in the specimen during recording is the probing depth which is defined as dt ð þ to determine the thermal conductivity with good accuracy the shortest distance from any part of the sensor to the nearest outside boundary of the sample should larger than..
in our experiments the used hot disk sensor has radius of..
the shortest distance is about and the probing depth is approximately..
for this probing depth value can consider that are conducting bulk measurement..
tests on specimens under saturated and dry conditions where is the time measured from the start of the transient recording is the characteristic time which depends both on parameters of the sensor and the sample and is the thermal diffusivity of the sample..
firstly the specimens were immersed deionized water in vacuum for period of the specimens were then taken from the vacuum and the water droplets on the surfaces were wiped dry care being taken to ensure that no rock grains or fragments were lost..
the mass of the water saturated specimens was measured using tectonophysics..
loading measurement time min time axial compression stress mpa..
typical curves showing the mass changes of several specimens during saturation..
the designed stress path in the thermal conductivity measurement..
our tests revealed that the mass of the specimens could approximately constant under vacuum within see indicating that the specimens were saturated with water..
subsequently the hot disk sensor was horizontally placed between the two saturated specimen pieces with the double spiral centered and totally covered and the two specimen pieces were firmly clamped together to ensure that there was no air gap between the sensor and the specimen end surfaces as presented in in order to remain water saturation the saturated specimens and the sensor were kept in plastic bag during thermal conductivity measurement..
after the test the used water saturated specimens were suffered from dehydration treatment in thermostatic drying oven at for period of and subsequently cooled in desiccator to measure the thermal conductivity under dry condition..
meanwhile the mass of the dry specimens mdry was measured and the porosity of the specimens was calculated using the equations..
mdry ð þ ð þ where is the bulk rock volume vp is the pore volume and is the density of water..
for each pair of specimens saturated or dried measurements on the thermal conductivity were carried out at room temperature..
tests on specimens under increasing temperature to investigate the effect of temperature on the thermal conductivity of the tested rocks measurements were performed on dry specimens from to based on the requirements of the used test equipment..
compared with measurements at room temperature the experiments under high temperature are time consuming due to slow stepwise heating process using constant temperature oil bath and temperature control system as shown in the thermal conductivity measurement can only conducted until the two specimen pieces in the chamber with specimen holder within the oil bath have reached thermal equilibrium and kept target temperature value..
during thermal equilibrium of the oil bath the hot disk sensor monitors continuously the temperature variation of the specimens..
for our tests the thermal conductivity of the specimens was measured when the recorded temperature variation of the specimens is less than..
in general were needed to complete one test..
typical temperature time history during the test is presented in..
it should variation of specimen temperature oc variation of specimen temperature temperature of oil bath temperature of oil bath oc time..
typical temperature time history showing the variation of the oil bath temperature with time and the evolution of specimen temperature variation during the thermal conductivity measurement on pair of specimens porosity kdry kdry ksat..
comparison of the average thermal conductivity values measured under dry kdry and water saturated ksat conditions for the eight rock groups..
the shaded zone covers the rock groups with an average porosity range between and..
error bars indicate the standard deviation of the thermal conductivity..
the thermal conductivity measurement was performed at each incremental stress level..
after each measurement the load was maintained constant for period of about min to avoid residual temperature drifts on the specimens..
based on the in situ stress measurement results obtained from the beishan area the maximum axial compression stress applied to the specimens was set to to approximately simulate the excavation induced stress near the vertical hlw disposal element boundary at depth of the axial stress applied to the specimens was recorded automatically and the used stress path throughout the course of testing is presented in..
the experiments were conducted at room temperature..
according to previous experimental results the identified crack initiation stresses of cylindrical specimens of beishan granitic rocks under uniaxial compression using the cumulative ae hit caeh method range from to mpa which are larger than the maximum compression stress adopted in the present study..
hence the stress induced rock damage might not occur in the tested specimens during loading..
it should mentioned that in the process of loading the friction may occur at the interfaces between the specimen ends and the sensor..
due to limitation of the tps measurement technique the utilized test method does not consider the potential influence of interface friction effect on the experimental results..
to reduce or eliminate the friction effect further efforts are needed to produce innovative design for the test equipment..
although not perfect the developed test system provides feasible means for us to gain insight into thermal conductivity behaviors of rocks under compression..
influence of water saturation on the thermal conductivity porosity thermal conductivity and effect of water saturation for pairs of beishan granitic rock specimens under dry and water saturated conditions..
rock type and group specimen pair no..
density porosity thermal conductivity effect of water saturation monzodiorite granodiorite monzodiorite granodiorite monzodiorite granodiorite monzodiorite monzodiorite..
kdry ksat noted that the water saturated specimens were not adopted in this test because little was known about how the gradual heating and the thermal equilibrium processes would affect the water content of the specimens leading to difficulties in evaluating the relationship between the thermal conductivity and the water saturation degree of the specimens quantitatively..
tests on specimens under uniaxial compression the uniaxial compression tests on dry specimens were conducted using hydraulic servo controlled compression machine..
for each test two specimen pieces with the hot disk sensor were contained between steel platens machined to match their end surfaces as shown in the interfaces between the specimens and the steel platens were daubed with thin layer of lubricant to reduce the end effect of the platens during loading..
when the experimental setup was completed axial load control was used with loading rate of and the axial load was increased with an increment thermal conductivity measurements were carried out on the pairs of specimens both in dry and water saturated conditions and the results are listed in..
statistical analysis shows that for the eight rock groups under dry or saturated state the standard deviation and coefficient of variation cov of the thermal conductivity are all less than and respectively indicating that the results between specimens in each rock group have good consistency..
for all rock groups the average thermal conductivity values in the dry state kdry range between and..
the values under watersaturated condition ksat for the same set of specimens range from tectonophysics tectonophysics..
calculated ksat calculated ksat measured ksat..
measured ksat calculated ksat calculated ksat measured ksat measured ksat..
actual test data and calculated thermal conductivities of beishan granitic rock specimens under water saturated condition using four mixing arithmetic geometric and effective medium..
it is seen from that the tested rocks have an average porosity range from to..
when the dry specimens were saturated with water water with higher thermal conductivity replaced the air with lower thermal conductivity in the void of the rocks leading to an increase of the thermal conductivity..
for our data set the thermal conductivity values of the saturated specimens in different rocks groups range from to higher than those of dry ones..
as presented in for the rock groups and with an average porosity range between and the influence of water saturation on the thermal conductivity of the rocks is relatively small and ksat increases with increasing kdry in an approximately linear temperature oc thermal conductivity porosity..
variation of the effect of water saturation on thermal conductivity with porosity of the eight rock groups..
the shaded zone represents the confidence limit for the linear regression..
variation of thermal conductivity of seven pairs of specimens in different rock groups with increasing temperature up to and their best fits..
variation of the fit coefficient of the thermal conductivity temperature curves with rock porosity of seven pairs of specimens in different rock groups and its best fit..
the thermal conductivity of these specimens at room temperature was also measured and the data were added to this figure..
it is seen that the thermal conductivity of the specimens shows decaying trend with increasing temperature and the values at range from to lower than those at room temperature..
this means that within the used temperature range the influence of the increasing temperature on the decay of thermal conductivity for these rocks is limited..
on the other hand possible reason for the gradual decrease in thermal conductivity is the generation of thermally induced microcracks in the rocks because of mismatch between thermal expansion coefficients of adjacent mineral grains in homogeneous temperature field which has been demonstrated from microcracking perspective based on numerical simulations zhao..
based on the experimental data the relationship between thermal conductivity and temperature can described using the..
at ð þ where kr is the thermal conductivity of the rock at room temperature is the temperature in celsius and is the fit coefficient see..
the parameter affects the decaying velocity of the thermal conductivity with the temperature the decaying velocity of the thermal conductivity increases as increases..
as shown in in eq..
varies from rock to rock and can determined only using laboratory tests..
in order to develop model for predicting individual fit overall fit model thermal conductivity temperature oc..
comparison of overall fit using the temperature and rock porosity dependent thermal conductivity model and individual fit of seven pairs of specimens in different rock groups..
however with further increase of rock porosity the approximately linear relationship between kdry and ksat is not valid anymore..
for example the rock groups and with average porosity values greater than or equal to exhibit higher thermal conductivity in the water saturated state relative to the dry state..
to evaluate the thermal conductivity of rocks various mixing models such as the geometric lichtenecker the arithmetic voigt the and and the effective medium have been proposed..
comprehensive overviews and case studies on such mixing models can found in..
based on the experimental data see in combination with the methodology used the abovementioned mixing models were used to predict the thermal conductivity values of the tested rocks in the water saturated state..
shows the comparison between measured and calculated thermal conductivities for the four different models..
it can observed from and that the geometric the arithmetic and the effectivemedium yield similar prediction results and consistently underestimate the thermal conductivity of the eight rock groups especially for the groups with relatively high porosity values groups and..
the shows reasonably good fit for all rock groups as shown in the analysis results are basically in line with observations reported because most of the evaluated mixing models used in their analysis also underestimate the thermal conductivity of the rocks..
however the geometric model was rated as the best fit to their data set..
it should noted that the rocks used in their analysis covered different rock types with large range in porosity from almost zero to about..
in addition the measured thermal conductivity values of these rocks spans the interval between and..
the present investigations focused mainly on the granitic rocks with low porosities and narrow thermal conductivity range..
hence the large difference of rock properties may result in uncertainties between analysis results obtained from various mixing models..
more work is required to explain this discrepancy..
and defined the effect of water saturation on thermal conductivity as function of porosity of rocks andis expressed ksat kdry kdry ð þ according to the measurement results listed in established the relationship betweenand the porosity of the rocks as presented in..
analysis of reveals that the effect of water saturation on thermal conductivity of rocks presents an increasing trend with an increase of porosity..
linear form expression can fit the data reasonably well while ensuring that the line passes through the origin..
influence of temperature on the thermal conductivity presents the variation of thermal conductivity of seven pairs of dry specimens in different rock groups with temperature from fit coefficient for thermal conductivity temperature curves of seven pairs of specimens in different rock groups..
rock type and specimen no..
tectonophysics axial stress mpa axial stress mpa thermal conductivity thermal conductivity..
axial stress mpa axial stress mpa axial stress mpa porosity thermal conductivity thermal conductivity thermal conductivity axial stress mpa axial stress mpa axial stress mpa thermal conductivity thermal conductivity thermal conductivity..
influence of axial compression stress on the thermal conductivity of the eight rock..
and and variation of the increase rate of the thermal conductivity with rock porosity..
error bars indicate the standard deviation of the thermal conductivity..
in the figures represents the number of specimen pairs in each rock group..
attempted to relate with other rock parameters and found that depended on the magnitude of rock porosity as presented in..
the coefficient varies with porosity according to the following ð þ according to eqs..
an overall fit for different rock groups is made to illustrate the temperature dependent thermal conductivity model considering rock porosity..
indicates that the results of the overall fit using the model agree well with the results of individual fit based on experimental data..
it should noted that the established eqs..
are best fit curves for thermal conductivity in range of test temperatures..
although they can used to estimate the thermal conductivity within this range they should not extrapolated to temperatures lower than or higher than..
on the other hand the model was established using limited data..
when more test data are available the model individual fit overall fit thermal conductivity axial stress mpa..
comparison of overall fit using the axial stress and rock porosity dependent thermal conductivity model and individual fit of specimens in different rock groups..
for the tested rocksranges from to..
inspection of and shows that the effects of compression stress and water saturation on the thermal conductivity are basically comparable..
it should mentioned that if the axial stress is further increased new cracks in the rocks will generated propagated and coalesced..
the stress induced rock damage will result in deterioration of thermal conductivity..
hence from low to high compression stress conditions the thermal conductivity may increase to its peak value after which it may decrease gradually..
however the influence of stress induced damage on the thermal conductivity characteristics has been beyond the scope of this study..
based on the fit coefficients for thermal conductivity axial stress curves of beishan granitic rocks under uniaxial compression..
rock type and group granodiorite granodiorite granodiorite..
parameters can fine tuned to suit the temperature dependent thermal conductivity of rocks..
influence of axial stress on the thermal conductivity under uniaxial compression condition thermal conductivity measurements on pairs of dry specimens in different rock groups were conducted..
to analyze the thermal conductivity of the tested rocks with respect to axial stress the experimental results were plotted on the graph as given in it can observed that the thermal conductivities of all rocks vary with increasing axial stress in nonlinear behavior which is basically in agreement with the observations reported other researchers..
at the initial loading stage there is rapid increase of the thermal conductivities due to closure of pre existing pores and microcracks in the rocks..
in this stage the increasing gradient of the thermal conductivities decreases as the axial stress increases..
this means that the crack closure rate and axial stiffness of the rocks decreases and increases gradually respectively..
in the subsequent loading the increasing gradient of the thermal conductivities changes little which may represent that the elastic deformation of the rocks occurs..
for each rock group the increase rate of the thermal conductivity can defined..
ð þ where kl and is the thermal conductivities of the specimens at the last compression stress level and before loading respectively..
the ratiois found to dependent on rock porosity as shown in it is seen thatpresents an increasing trend with increasing tectonophysics..
variation of fit coefficients and of the thermal conductivity axial stress curves with porosity of the eight rock groups..
meanwhile the coefficient in eq..
is not sensitive to the variation of rock porosity and is within the range from to except for the rock group..
for simplicity an average value of obtained from is used to approximately describe the trend as shown in using eqs..
and the constant coefficient an overall fit is made for these rock groups to reproduce the rock porosity dependent thermal conductivity under different axial stresses..
comparison between individual and overall fit results is presented in..
it is found that for each rock group subjected to different compression stresses the difference of the thermal conductivity values from the individual and overall fits is less than..
the good agreement indicates that the established rock porosity dependent model can capture the nonlinear stress thermal conductivity relationships of the beishan granitic rocks satisfactorily..
discussion one of the findings from the experimental investigations in the previous sections is that the rock porosity has an influence on the thermal conductivity of the beishan granitic rocks under water saturation increasing temperature and compression stress conditions although the porosity of tested rocks is relatively low..
it is well known that for low porosity crystalline rocks the mineral composition plays an important role in dominating the thermal conductivity..
the crystalline rocks are mainly made up of quartz feldspars and mafic minerals such as pyroxene amphibole and biotite and the content of minerals from these three mineral groups basically determines rock thermal conductivity..
as mentioned in section model analysis on total of thin sections of the rocks was conducted to identify the dominant minerals in the rocks..
as listed in the main minerals of these rocks include quartz plagioclase feldspar and biotite..
among these four minerals quartz has the highest thermal conductivity while another three minerals have thermal conductivity range between and horai..
hence when the porosity values of the specimens in different rock groups are close to each other quartz content in the rocks may determine the thermal conductivity..
according to the data listed in presents the influence of quartz content on the average thermal conductivity of different rock groups in dry state..
it is seen that except for rock groups and thermal conductivity of the rocks appears an increasing trend with increasing quartz content..
when the specimens are subjected to compression stresses the original pores and cracks in the rocks tend to close and the effective contact areas between mineral grains increase leading to significant decay of the porosity effect on the thermal conductivity especially for rocks with relatively high porosity..
on the other hand the closure of pores and cracks increases the contact opportunity of quartz grains and hence improves the transportation capability of heat flow in the rocks..
under this condition an obvious increase of the thermal conductivity for all rock groups with increasing quartz content can observed as presented in..
conclusions beishan granitic rocks are candidate host rock types for china hlw repository..
in this paper thermal conductivity characteristics of the beishan granitic rocks have been investigated using the transient plane source tps method..
the measurement results indicate that for the used eight rock groups with porosity range from to the average thermal conductivity values in the dry state range between and..
the values under water saturated condition range from to meanwhile the effect of water saturation on thermal conductivity presents an increasing trend with an increase of rock porosity..
using several mixing models proposed previous researchers found that the model showed reasonably good fit to the experimental data while another three models currently obtained data best fitting equation of axial stressdependent thermal conductivity for these rocks can expressed as..
ð þ where is the thermal conductivity of the rock at zero stress is the axial stress andand are fit coefficients as listed in..
analysis of eq reveals that the coefficientplays critical role in controlling the increasing gradient of the thermal conductivity in the initial loading stage crack closure stage..
the coefficient dominantly affects the increasing velocity of the thermal conductivity in the subsequent elastic deformation stage..
based on experimental investigations on the thermal conductivity of some rocks subjected to uniaxial stresses using steady state apparatus developed found that the parametersand depended on the magnitude of elastic modulus of the rocks and subsequently established an elastic modulus dependent model to predict the thermal conductivity values under pressure..
unfortunately in the present study the elastic moduli of the tested rocks have not been available..
therefore the model proposed cannot used to fit our test results..
according to found that the increasing gradients of the thermal conductivities in the initial loading stage were generally large for the rocks with high porosity such as rock groups and..
hence the coefficientis associated with the rock porosity increases as increases as presented in an exponential form expression can fit the data reasonably as þ..
thermal conductivity thermal conductivity quartz content..
influence of quartz content on the average thermal conductivities of the eight rock groups in dry state and compression state with an axial stress of mpa..
tectonophysics geometric the arithmetic and the effective medium yielded similar predictions and underestimated the thermal conductivity of the rocks under the water saturated condition..
future work is demanded to verify the validity of various mixing models using different rock types with large porosity range..
with increasing temperature from to the thermal conductivity of the rocks shows decaying trend and the values at range from to lower than those at room temperature revealing that the influence of temperature on the thermal conductivity of the tested rocks is limited..
in addition the thermal conductivity of the rocks increases with increasing compression stress in nonlinear behavior and the increase rate of the thermal conductivity increases with an increase of rock porosity..
it is found that the effects of compression stress and water saturation on the magnitude of thermal conductivity of the rocks are basically comparable..
based on the experimental data the empirical models considering the influence of rock porosity have been established for predicting the temperature and compression stress dependent thermal conductivity characteristics of the rocks and the predictions are found to in good agreement with experimental results..
this study thus emphasizes importance of porosity on thermal conductivity measurements even for low porosity crystalline rocks..
when the pores and cracks in the rocks tend to close during compression quartz content may determine the thermal conductivity and there exists an increase of the thermal conductivity with increasing quartz content..
this is because the closure of pores and cracks increases the contact opportunity of quartz grains and hence improves the transportation capability of heat flow in the rocks..
while the test results provide insights into the thermal conductivity characteristics of beishan granitic rocks one should aware of the limitation of this study..
because the thermal conductivity of granitic rocks is influenced many factors..
in order to better understand the thermal conductivity of granitic rocks related to rock characteristics such as rock fabric grain shape grain contact and grain size comprehensive petrographic investigations are recommended in the future..
in the meantime studies should carried out to understand how the interactions between mineral components affect the thermal conductivity..
work is also being conducted to investigate the thermal conductivity of the rocks under coupled thermal hydro mechanical conditions..
introduction studies of the concentrations of primordial sediments radioelement and decay products have drawn in natural the marine the atten tion of many geochemists mainly because of its application and cochran near shore receiving..
have been also as im in marine chronology chanton shelf increasing sediments interest and an the ex sites..
to studies on the heat radiogenic these these coastal sediments..
impor has been given and environments for and salter accumulation hydrocarbon properties constitute of elsevier science publishers..
sampling the average sites of the sediment of samples..
site is within the cananeia iguape lagoon and rep and maturation..
represent heat which and dehydration to the gol mshtok petroleum the the natural radioelements here supplementary source of in conjunction slow chemical will ultimately reactions with compaction contribute involved in..
the brazilian continental thermal are still poorly and isolated thomson known properties for their except studies and like those shelf sediments radioelements for few by published demaster and maragoni and perhaps by the studies performed et..
by oil companies which are not readily avail able through and hamza the scientific is literature..
reconnaissance this work natural thorium respec the and potassium content equivalent content the thermal radiogenic conductivity of the uranium the..
and eu and eth production of sediments heat radioactive concentration equilibrium obtained the in by decay assuming series..
secularin two distinct the continental lagoon formed iguape de in with ing sediment phleger type sedimentation shelf off paulo and the the ribeira at is shown river..
the indicat surface by use of the estuary of study the encircled numbers sites..
the bottom samples were collected area sediment sampler gravity corer..
experimental techniques in small mortar the samples were oven dried and homo the and for more containers after which to achieve equilibrium its decay products..
of the and samples were cm nai height pulse calibrated regularly following standards genized samples were weighed stored in sealed plastic than days in order between rays by low noise mercury shielded channel system was of suitable described activity energy the series and mev in the assumption rium in are equal parents..
be determined any one of of the respective series..
elsewhere the for mev the short lived the activities to thus mev the of under series was measured..
equilib of secular radioactive the and th series these activities long lived the of the and th content by knowing the activity can of in each daughter then the analysed in..
and this set detector analyzer..
photopeak the of in for th for the effects crosstalk of background between the minimized described by the following wold and kosanke by use of stripping equations photopeaks radiation and were technique stroms ci kj jai..
stands where ith airadioelement is the counting is the concentration in parts per million for th and the of ppm rate per gram of sample ci and jth photopeak of the calibration several combinations the constants the of obtained rock in the it..
the our after from simpler in order in detail pulse height the original spectrometry..
approximately ratio between by treatment and fleer isotopic was measured chemical changes meet grams of sediment were employed analysis..
alpha with after electroplating in..
minimum employed the resolution at half maximum at best..
counting to sample and was that fractional for each energy peak..
the heat production and spectrometry described by with few minor to for each was carried out analyser the from solutions onto plates..
with detector thickness was particles..
of the of the whole system measured at mev was kev sample time so less than stainless steel silicon pm in the counting varied individually error was always to radioelement surface barrier depletion adjusted from due the in the sediments was calculated from data obtained concentration less abundant decay the equivalent for and th..
the contribution other heat taken vert radiogenic equation production into account the radioisotope heat production was employed is negligible radioelements of and the to and was not in our estimates..
to con into concentration data following the schmucker pw..
where is the sediment density in kg..
the thermal some benefits traditional was measured with..
this meth to is as compared steady state it to evaporation to changes in thermal and non of inter pore water..
by cm diametersilt silt bd sand silt..
sand sand sand silt fine fine sand fine sand silt as above as above very fine medium as above as above very fine fine very silt fine fine very coarse very very fine very fine coarse medium fine coarse same very fine very silt silt carb..
very bd bd as before fine sand some silt silt fine carb..
bd as before fine sand sand fine sand fine sand fine sand fine shells sand old bd silt carb..
bd sand fine old bd silt silt silt old bd fine silt fine fine silt sand carb..
silt old bd old bd old bd carb..
coarse same very very very very very fine coarse very coarse very very fine medium medium fine carb..
st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st st..
st st st st short cm..
eu sample st shelf the continental for and lagoon iguape the cananbia for data obtained experimental table are one brackets within tr trace..
after samples content conductivity for estuary total and carbonate thermal..
production heat and ward bd biogenic radiogenic folk after classification of each observation..
for and stand the size dard the deviation symbols carb..
silt silt sand fine silt carb..
sand silt coarse coarse very fine fine coarse carb..
sand sand sand sand no carb..
fine fine sand fine sand medium very medium very fine very fine coarse as above as above silt carb..
sand sand fine very coarse very fine coarse as above very fine silt fine fine very carb..
sand sand fine fine carb..
bd bd some coarse carb..
sand very fine medium bd sand fine some fine very carb..
silt sand fine coarse very tr tr tr..
tr st tr tr tr tr tr tr st st st st st st st st st st probe with length the measurements the needle probe power the electric in its interior..
cm ther into sediment insulated container..
by cm is deposited inserting and length stainless steel linear heater and thermistor the diameter mally were made by fully sediment into the to furnished present obtained the the change the due to within filament given by mately in heat thermistor from value..
the change the change in read by digital multimeter..
of temperature in temperature resistivity the sediment linear the produced the probe can be approxi by the heater was adjusted to is of ch..
kj bl to the thermal dimension is parameter conductivity with by the where is the heat produced of the is the thermal time and and related is the the diameter time elapsed of and is constant..
plot of the temperature vs the natural nk conductivity of will have slope to the thermal logarithm inversely proportional the needle the beginning of diffusivity of the sample..
of from results and discussions table tained in presents the experimental this work plus short description data ob for point normal of data is rejected distributions and brown the th shelf en the concentrations..
the same statistical the concentration the cananeia iguape the samples..
from that for the of logarithm and statistical that the lagoonal environments show statistically of view we observed for and both shelf sediments lagoon and for the continental follow at significance level of by the test..
the hypothesis of normality vironment distribution the th data by performing fits test to further and have shown distributed tinental centrations values and standard environments with lagoon..
this is probably tion of as compared the continental is also more although we are comparing different averaging marizes experimental the con while con average two the frac lagoon in..
the th lagoon since with ii sum the to to more calcareous sediments see table in to be careful averages performed processes..
table tests applied tests were applied is homogeneously in in these values for to larger the the statistical data..
lithogenic material within deviations larger here we have concentrated in shelf different shelf due and the isotopic the samples the ratio was measured for some of to verify in order the prevailing origin of the in the sediments..
to with from these ranged ratios deviation and standard an average of table ii summary of the statistical tests applied to the radioelement content of the sediments environment radioelement average lagoon shelf..
ppm ppm ppm standard deviation ppm ppm ppm test xz ppm the figures within brackets are the log normal statistics..
in the than least seawaters terrigenous is typically lower for isotopic it is slightly ratio is larger the global..
than what would sediment lower ratio sources for important are known sediments by the crustal material the authigenic seawater from after of..
this average nevertheless for purely be expected isotopic in which two than..
at the the marine besides the brought entering the precipitated directly of pg ducing scavenging daughter be efficiently techniques..
whichever cess might be the net effect of additional non equilibrium sediments..
none of which can by spectrometric is an enrichment in the shelf the seawater measured under the continuous of from average and insoluble the depositional pro contour map of the radiogenic production was prepared from the heat spec illustrated heat here..
data and of by trometry granulometry resented can be seen that ly associated with the sediment the the same positive for observed elements but is not is shown the sediments the contour map of..
the is also rep it is close finer the heat produced..
the heat production the grain size..
the larger correlation has also been radio the analyzed each of frequency radiogenic in of calculation are presented data distribution of jlw..
in order the also as with an average of deviation any biasing larger number lagoon pling were averaged shelf samples as single data point ing the thus obtained uw and standard to prevent to much due of samples per unit area in the to more spread sam the former data represent the average the radio as compared in the continental environment..
lower and added the other is lagoonal shelf than to..
contour map for the radiogenic heat production data..
contour map for the grain size data following folk and ward classification..
the ray measurements were made on any chemical in this case the secular the th series as is calculation the rapid between half life to time scale typical sedimentation in samples without from longest the daughter in coastal et or leaching..
equilibrium the heat production is due valid..
this disequilibrium of to the whole sediment treatment radioactive sumed in probably covery and as compared ly involved blanchard ganguly thorough considerations..
does not occur take up to ma to recover rium situation..
suggest in time contribute we add production to also contributes time the to dependence fact further that the more this that for to see and for more the same can et however the series which as the sedimentation nonequilibrium from disequilib the evidences discussed above proceeds to begins if heat..
the heat radiogenic on the the compaction increase the heat heat production..
frequency production distribution in the sediments..
of the radiogenic heat by rock having rep genie heat produced..
the bimodal schmucker reveals once more this histogram grain size the concentration character the sediment radioelement dependency process..
ofby the that the data can be viewed only as lower pro the produced we may arrive at calculated for limit duced by the whole sediment pile..
conductivity thermal in table are also for some of..
the average value with standard maragoni an average of of pw..
measured with standard deviation for data presented the samples obtained deviation and hamza..
of sediment south continental studies present conductivities sediments from ratcliffe and et..
to pw are composed mostly oozes while coarser dominates..
quartz of quartz is all other major shelf and deep ocean the explain for the shelf sediments..
shelf terrigenous larger from from samples shelf..
results higher for in more spread analysis the brazilian both thermal significantly deep ocean data than and maxwell..
from which pelagic sediments of clay and calcareous richer in are in which sediments range constituents thermal larger the times constituents sediments..
conductivity than of both that of the this should data thermal conductivity acknowledgements this work was partially supported by from cnpq brazil no finep under contract foundations usa are also grateful the authors for thermal the the ray measurements astronomico institute conductivity were geofisi grants fndct brazil ct and..
made at the co usp brazil..
introduction the framework of european geotraverse egt geothermal studies have been undertaken order to evaluate the surface heat flow and the temperature field within the lithosphere..
the area encompassing the southern segment of the egt belongs to the western mediterranean domain where both alpine structures and young oceanic crust exist..
such context heat transfer time dependent and evaluation of the temperature field requires thermal modelling of the transient processes uplift and erosion rifting and oceanic accretion sedimentation etc..
there exist few areas the western mediterranean where hercynian basement outcrops which could be used to obtain reference thermal state for this modelling work..
this paper interest focused on the thermal regime of the elsevier science publishers..
locations of the basin and the hercynian basement the western mediterranean..
crosses indicate the hercynian outcrops..
shaded areas indicate the alpine erogenic zones..
hercynian outer parts of the provenqal basin northwest mediterranean maures and esterel the southern part of france and and sardinia..
the al basin was formed during the oligocene by rifting of the continental lithosphere and then by oceanic accretion which shifted the corsicasardinia block away from france burrus..
this basin the continental crust progressively thinned to about km whereas crustal thickness normal the maures recq him and and sardinia..
therefore these areas were probably not affected by either alpine orogeny or continental rifting..
the thermal regime of the hercynian crust discussed using heat flow and heat production data from and..
fission track data are used to make sure that erosion processes have not perturbed the temperature field..
contour map of heat flow the western mediterranean resulting from compilation of all existing data presented the final discussion of the paper..
also presented model for stable hercynian crust based on the presentday thermal regime of the maures and esterel..
heat flow dpita data have been previously published by and are gathered this paper with nine new measurements..
sevenheat ffrom new measurements are presented..
temperature surveys were carried out with thermistor probe giving relative accuracy of ol..
temperature profiles were corrected to account for topographic effects according to the classical procedure..
other correction was applied to the data..
conductivity measurements were made on watersaturated with transient method of determination..
low all of the data were obtained shallow boreholes drilled for water resources..
but only unproductive boreholes were used..
temperature profiles are displayed most of them have curvature which can be explained some cases by thermal conductivity contrasts partinello or water circulation casavecchie lama and luri..
other boreholes there evidence for water circulation to explain this curvature..
however for the most reliable data the variation of the thermal gradient within the borehole does not exceed km..
for all of the boreholes the hercynian basement the standard deviation on the average gradient km of the same order of magnitude..
this temoeratures thermal gradientkm depth lama..
temperature profiles versus depth for the various boreholes logged..
temperatures are represented using an arbitrary scale one division representing one degree..
the value on the upper part of each profile represents the actual temperature at the depth for which the thermal log begins..
the stars correspond to data already published by..
suggests that all of the data are consistent despite the shallow depths and the uncertainties for individual values of thermal gradient..
none of these boreholes have been coged and conductivities were estimated from measurements on surface samples..
heat flow values are presented..
the average value mw for all of the data and mw for boreholes deeper than this value therefore representative of the surface heat flow but local heat flow data from..
depth conducthermal heat flow tithology range tivity gradient..
km north average heat flow mw luri luri south average heat flow mw casavecchie ghisonaccia..
average heat flow mw novella lama lama osani area average heat flow mw rn partinelto osani osani osani ajuccio area average value mw alata alata truva south ajaccio area average heat flow mw face..
urbalacone piattone sartene bronco ct..
schist schist loo schist sandstone flysch spilite granite rhyolite granite granite granite carbon schist gram te granite gabbro granite granite granite granite granite average heat flow values calculated only for borehofes deeper than..
uc uncorrected corrected for topographic effects..
value previously published by et..
qo osani osani qo lama..
estimated heat flow for different prownces of..
superposed on the geological map..
ixge dots represent heat flow measurements..
stars indicate horeholes deeper than used the averaging..
variations can be expected for the different structural units and..
both on the mesozoic unit and on the hercynian unit of tenda has slightly higher heat flow..
the ajaccio area characterized by lower heat flow..
heat flow from the maures and stprel southern france seven new data are two the maures..
two estcrel and three the vicinity of the hercynian basement..
temperature profiles are presented they are obviously more regular than those of and boreholes are deeper..
heat flow values are given and..
the two boreholes from esterel and have been drilled for mining research the permian rhyolites..
heat flow values obtained these two boreholes respectively and correspond to reliable data according to the egt criterion..
the two boreholes from the maures ramatuelle and are shallower and conductivities were estimated from surface samples however heat flow values respectively and mw temperature arbitrary scale gratadls..
temperature profiles versus depth for the various boreholes logged maures and estcrel..
temperatures are represented using an arbitrary scale one division representing one degree..
the value on the upper part of each profile represents the actual temperature at the depth at which the thermal log begins..
gneish vtcinity of el maures clue heat flow data from mauresestcrel locality long..
depth conducthermal heat flow lithology range tivity gradient ct mm ckm fzw mw mm..
maure ramatuelle uchist rel pelite rhyolite cratadis rhyolite dolomite gardanne limestone cartes oil data uc uncorrected ct corrected for topographic effects..
estimated heat flow from maures and esttrel..
diorite leucogranite cordieritegranite granitegneiss metamorphic schist gneiss and anatectic gneiss..
are consistent with values obtained esterel..
three other measurements have been obtained the vicinity of the hercynian basement of provence and confirm values from the maures and esterel..
one of these data corresponds to an oil exploration borehole for which one bht measurement was available at the bottom and was corrected for mud circulation effects..
the average value this area mw me indicates that heat flow close to the average european value mw and to values obtained other stable hercynian provinces of europe cermak..
continents the thermal regime of the crust closely related to the nature and distribution of heat sources..
moreover some stable areas of the world linear relationship exists between surface heat flow and surface heat production..
therefore important to study the surface heat production order to evaluate the contribution of heat sources to the surface heat flow..
heat production lated from uranium thorium and potassium concentrations according to the work of birch..
the present work new measurements from the maures and esterel are presented and compared with previous results from..
the hercynian basement outcropping the maures and esttrel mostly formed by metamorphic rocks different from the basement outcropping mostly formed by hercynian granites..
the mauresestcrel province characterized by two paleozoic metamorphic units the maures southwestern position and the tanneron northeastern position..
these two massifs are separated by the permian volcanic and sedimentary unit of the estcrel..
the petrographic features of the metamorphic basement have been studied by caruba and..
the western part of the maures mostly formed by rnicaschist and twomica gneiss intruded by..
the eastern part of the maures and the tanneron massif are formed by other metamorphic rocks mostly anatectic gneiss..
these two metamorphic domains are separated by fault along which the hercynian granite of plan de tour situated..
permian rhyolites correspond to the esttrel massif sensu stricto..
granitic equivalent of these rhyolites was found as xenoliths the oligocene esttrellite rnicrodiorite..
classically divided into two on the western part of the island which corresponds to the abduction of mesozoic unit during the middle cretaceous and hercynian on the western and southern parts formed by the hercynian and permian granitic basement..
hercynian granites belong to two magmatic associations the talkalkaline and the subalkaline types..
permian granites represent anorogenic types associated with the rhyolites the northern part of the island but not the southern part..
this suggests that the level of erosion increasing from esterel rhyolites outcrop and granites exist at deeper levels to the north of both rhyolites and granites outcrop and finally..
to the south of only granites exist and..
and concentrations have been determined by epithermal neutron activation analysis enaa and compared for few samples..
to measurements obtained by gammaray spectrometry grs the difference generally lower than..
which acceptable for this heat production study..
samples are representative of the different geological formations and results are presented..
stephanian hercyncan granites paleozoic basement..
geological map of maures and esterel and location of samples analyzed for and method..
standard grs enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa grs enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa grs enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa..
gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn..
gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn..
gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn enaa enaa gsn gsn..
ppm wv granite gneiss average..
ml ml ml ml schist average ml heat production data from maures with average values for each petrologic type..
metamorphic rocks are classified two metasedimentary rocks gneiss and anatectic gneiss and granitegneiss..
the radiogenic content does not ficantly change with the grade of metamorphism for metasedimentary rocks and average heat production pw..
graniteegneiss has higher average content ufu kfu diorite rhyolite continued ppm thko ppm kkak affj pw method standard average ml ml average ml..
grs enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn..
gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gsn gamma ray enaa epithermal neutron activation analysis..
ufo gnrlss annrectrc gnr enaa enaa enaa enaa enaa grs enaa enaa rs..
and consequently higher heat production pw..
similar work the massif central france and vasseur have found values the same range..
surface anatectic gneiss of the massif central has heat production of pw whereas the same material erupted from depth of km during recent volcanism has heat production of pw..
other geological provinces of the world similar considerations apply..
granites of the maures and esterel are close to the leucogranite type of the massif central with low th and values characteristic of granites of crustal origin..
heat production of these granites..
the sensu massif of esttrel formed by permian rhyolites..
heat production of these rocks..
finally diorites have low heat production pw and only represent small outcropping volumes sli..
oi or fields of grains number..
ma dose neutron cmz tracks tracks tracks tracks apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite..
el ml ml ml induced fossit mineral sample apatite fission track data from the maures and estcrel ml ml and ml and from apatite apatite apatite apatite..
apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite apatite..
for natural state without laboratory annealing one hour laboratory annealing at..
one hour laboratory annealing at..
number of tracks actually counted..
relative standard error of the mean for the inducedtrack count apatite..
cl counted by observer other than..
fish canyon age standard counted at the same time as the samples..
error calculated from the poisson relative standard error of mean..
previous heat production data from cocks these data have been published by but interesting to recall their principal results order to discuss heat flow data..
the talcalkaline granites represent about threethirds of the outcrops hercynian..
they are obviously depleted uranium ppm as very high..
heat production only pw similar granites the massif central have higher average uranium content ppm and ratio of about and vasseur consistent with the expected for granites..
granites of are therefore probably depleted because of some weathering process..
the leucocratic granites represent evolved members of the talkalkaline series..
they are enriched uranium and have high heat production pw mm..
the subalkali granites are enriched uranium ppm and thorium ppm..
they consequently have high heat production pw rn..
these values are close to the average values for similar granites the massif central..
finally the heat production of permian anorogenic granites vary from to pw mj apatite fission track data fission tracks represent daughter products of the disintegration of and can be used as dating method..
the special feature of this method that the closure of the system strongly sensitive to temperature..
this closure temperature characteristic of minerals and for apatites about..
therefore this could be an excellent indicator of paleogeothermal conditions as apatite ages represent the last cooling below loo corresponding to depth of about km..
the present study two sets of data were measurements from published by together with zircon three new apatite ages from the maures and estcrel simultaneously determined with the international standard fish canyon tuff complete the previous data..
results are presented and which drawn its preoligocene position..
more information about the method and references can be found mailht..
the alpine part of characterized by eoceneoligocene apatite ages whereas the northwest part of the island and the maures and estcrel give cretaceous ages..
and interpreted fission track data the eastern part of assuming differential erosion subsequent to the wellknown eocene compressional stage with erosion rates of as high as mm yri..
on the other hand the western part of the maures and estcrel and probably the region between them have only been affected by the cretaceous phase of the alpine orogeny as shown by older apatite ages..
this indicates that erosional process occurred between the middle cretaceous and the oligocene rifting..
there geological evidence for distention this area before therole of heat production..
apatite fission track data the maures and estcrel and..
the its presentday position whereas has reptaced its supposed preoligocene position after and burrus..
therefore except the thermal regime of the ilercynian crust at the onset of oligocene rifting was probably equilibrium..
dlscussion results presented the previous sections indicate that the surface heat flow significantly lower the maures and estcrel than mw rn..
moreover previous work sardinia has shown that heat flow generally low mw except the quaternary graben of campidano mw..
important to explain the origin of the higher value order to understand the thermal structure within and around the al basin..
heat production of granites presents wide range of values from pw to pw mj..
the lower boundary can be increased to about pw value of similar granites the massif central since granites are probably depleted uranium..
the difference between surface heat flows could then be explained by km more of talkalkaline granite or km more of enriched granite relative to the metamorphic basement the..
this explanation problematic however as surface granites are not associated with heat flow anomaly sardinia and as granites presumably exist as well at deeper levels the maures and esterel..
more likely that the radiogenic heat contribution of the crust these three areas roughly the same and that the heat flow anomaly of has another origin..
role of erosion has been affected by the alpine orogeny during two major the middle cretaceous phase which corresponds to the abduction process and the eocene phase which corresponds to the main tectonic compression..
attempted to derive erosion rates from combined fission track data zircons and apatites and thermal modelling..
maximum erosion rates during the eocene phase are observed and are less than mm yr..
at the present this yields maximum heat flow anomaly of less than mw but for the erosion rates which prevailed central and western increase surface heat flow expected..
therefore erosion could explain heat flow differences between alpine and hercynian but case the differences between and the maures and sardinia..
deepseated thermal anomaly the formation of the provensal basin since the oligocene could have affected the thermal regime of and increased the surface heat flow..
order to investigate this possibility necessary to gather heat flow data for wider domain than the hercynian outcrops..
available data the proveqal basin and tisseau burrus and the tyrrhenian sea della sardinia italy loddo and france vasseur as well as data presented this paper have been used to draw contour map of heat flow the western mediterranean with an automatic method..
data have been preliminarily interpolated using km window because of the nonuniform data distribution and this map therefore only represents the regional trends..
the hercynian domain characterized by low heat flow around mw except..
within the basin there high heat flow anomaly mw which extends from tuscany to the balearic basin..
this anomaly not directly connected to the oceanic domain but more likely corresponds to the margins of and sardinia..
the gulf of lions characterized by low heat flow mw which can be explained by the blanketing effect of the sediments which absorbs about of the surface heat flow and douaran..
major feature of this map therefore the asymmetric distribution of heat flow within the proveqal basin..
heat flow map of the provencal basin..
isovalucs are large points correspond to new measurements uncorrected uc for sedimentation dl mw rn..
other geological and geophysical anomalies also indicate that the two opposite margins of this basin are different..
have shown using esp seismic refraction techniques that the corsican margin more extended than the..
burrus using combined results of esp surveys and magnetics proposed an asymmetric model of oceanic accretion with greater apreading rates towards provence..
refraction seismic data on land hirn and and gravity data have shown that the continental crust km thick beneath and sardinia but thinned beneath the northwestern part of to about his supports the observations as do the asymmetric shapes of bathymetry rehault and the bouguer anomaly which indicate higher extension on the corsican margin..
these different anomalies indicate an asymmetric structure of the al basin..
and burrus and proposed that deepseated thermal anomaly located beneath the corsican according to the heat flow map this anomaly extends to tuscany and to the balearic basin and could be residual thermal anomaly related to the paleoridge..
this hypothesis could also explain how high relief can be associated with normal or thin crust..
on the other hand apparently contradicts surfacewave studies which predict thick lithosphere this area..
however the higher heat flow consequence of the recent evolution of the western mediterranean..
model of initial thermal state previous sections has been shown that the hercynian crust around the provenqal basin except characterized by low heat flow..
which probably corresponds to the equilibrium value of the stable hercynian domain..
interesting to study what the possible contributions of the crust and of the mantle to this surface heat flow are as necessary to estimate initial and boundary conditions thermal modelling..
the present day thermal state of the maures and esterel where reliable heat flow and heat production data are available can be used for this estimate..
possible way to derive the crustal radioactivity distribution from seismic crustal reflectors..
suggested that heat production could exponentially depend on the pwave velocity..
fact however upper crustal rocks have wide range of heat production values pw but pwave velocities range from only to km..
on the other hand rocks from the lower crust have narrow range of heat production values whereas pwave velocities range from to km st few seismic data are available the maures and estcrel..
after recq crustal thicknfss km along the coastline of the maures and increases northwards to km the calcareous provence..
recent surveys along the ligurian coastline and across the gulf of genova have shown that the crust formed by two km thick seismic the pwave velocity km for the upper layer and km for the lower layer..
from seismic data on the margin..
the continental crust thinned but the two layer structure at esp the closest to the maures the thickness of the stretched crust km with pwave velocity of km the km thick upper crust and km the km thick lower layer..
this structure similar to those observed other parts of the hercynian domain of france..
especially the outer parts of the massif central..
as there strong evidence that hercynian structures continue from the massif central to the maures and esterel information about the deep crust available the massif central from xenoliths carried up by the recent volcanism can be reasonably used the maures and estcrel..
average heat production of the upper crust estimated from surface rocks..
according to smithson and decker this layer formed by complex consisting mainly of metamorphic rocks mixed with granites the upper part..
the bulk of the granites difficult to evaluate..
enriched granites must generally be thin as they are not associated with negative gravity anomaly or higher heat flow either the massif central and vasseur or this study..
on the other hand thicker granites have lower heat production of pw..
therefore compared to the metamorphic basement pw mm..
such granites contribute an additional mw km or less to surface heat flow..
for the purpose of this model the effects of granites can be heat production of the metamorphic basement which relatively uniform from the surface to deeper levels attributed to this upper part of the crust..
mw to the surface heat flow assuming average heat production..
the lower crust average heat production ranges between and pw..
this corresponds to contribution of mw to the surface heat flow..
therefore mantle heat flow beneath the stable hercynian crust ranges from to mw this result agreement with global heat flow studies which predict mantle heat flow beneath stable provinces of about mw..
the average heat production of the crust to pw mm this result can be compared to geochemical models which predict to pw..
the temperature at the moho can be calculated on the basis of the distribution of heat ranges between rn and rn assuming constant conductivity the crust..
and between oc and rn..
assuming that thermal conductivity decreases with increasing temperature according to the model of wells..
conclusions the thermal structure of the western mediterranean difficult to understand as represents the interaction of different time dependent processes..
this part of the mediterranean sea still evolving and thermal modelling necessary to estimate the temperature field and the mantle heat flow which the final goal of thermal studies the egt programme..
this modelling work requires the establishment of reference thermal state order to estimate initial and boundary conditions..
this paper we have studied the hercynian area outcropping around the basin order to propose reference thermal state he western anean sea..
we believe that except these areas are presently at thermal equilibrium..
the maures and esterel where reliable heat flow and heat production data are available have been used to study the thermal state of the crust an area expected to correspond to stationary conditions..
the surface heat flow about mw ml and the crustal heat contribution estimated using seismic data ranges from to..
mantle heat flow therefore mw which agreement with general considerations on stable tectonic provinces..
the temperature at the moho..
on the other hand the hercynian batholith of has been affected by the alpine orogeny and subsequent erosion but also by deepseated thermal anomaly evidenced by different geological and geophysical anomalies..
the heat flow map for the western mediterranean resulting from compilation of all existing data reveals that this deepseated anomaly extends from tuscany to the balearic basin and could correspond to the paleoridge..
acknowledgements this work was financially supported by atp transferts..
would not have been possible without who made urements and provided us with valuable comments..
we also thank who provided us with gneiss samples from tanneron..
iieat flow measurements have been made owing to the help of mr from service des eaux de bastia mr mr from direction departementale deagriculture de draguignan and mr and mr from cogema..
we thank too and for providing gamma counting facilities at cfr gif..
this paper was critically reviewed by claude and another anonymous reviewer..
guy vasseur critically read the second version of this paper..
tectonophysics printed in the netherlands elsevier publishing company amsterdam warmeleitfahigkeitsmessijngen untcr einaxialem drijck eckart hurtig und hartmut brugger ion physik..
leipzig erkundung und geologie gen den..
april suhxmary the relations between heat conductivity and uniaxial pressure are studied..
the heat conductivity for the studied samples of anhydrite dolomite and sandstone but there is only small increase conglomerates the increase of the heat conductivity under uniaxial pressure seems is strongly dependent on pressure and porphyries..
in limestones to be determined by the crack porosity..
the data are important for heat flow tions..
einaxialer die zwischen druck und warmeleitfahigkeit untersucht..
ftlr anhydrite dolomite und sandsteine ist die konglomeraten und..
die xunahme der warmeleitfahig keit bei druckanstieg wird auf die riss porositllt zuriickgefiihrt..
berechnung des terrestrischen warme flusses ist der anstieg der warmeleitftlhigkeit bei zunehmendem druck stark vom druck..
in kalk erhoht sich die warmeleitfahig feinster haarrisse nnen besonders durch folgende faktoren mit erheblichen fehlern behaftet die bestimmung der mittleren warmeleitfahigkeit tes teufenintervall bildung in einem gegebenen vertikalprofil ist durch die unsicher..
die bestimmung ftir ein bestimm in der gesteinsaus in der regel unter normalen bedingungen..
uber die zwischen temperatur und eine anzahl von hungen durchgefuhrt clarke..
se birch und dagegen gibt es nur wenige werte uber das verhalten der warmeleit tectonophysics..
fahigkeit der verschiedenen gesteinstypen bei druckanstieg..
somerton et al walsh und decker..
die tsmesszelle divided bar apparatus nungen der thermoelemente wurden auf einem punktschreiber..
die unter einaxialen druck entspricht weitgehend dem ergibt sich mv zwischen die platten einer..
der rmeubergangswiderstand zwischen der nsprobe und den messzylindern der apparatur untersuchungen unter druck eine betrachtliche druckabhangigkeit der rmeleitfahigkeit vortlluschen..
die verbesserung des wlrmeflberganges gabe des druckes..
dieses druckes andert sich der rmeubergang nur geringftigig..
fur eine aseichplatte ergaben sich fol gende..
unmittelbar bei auf stets bei einem druck..
mcal fuhrt man die verbesserung des wilrmeuber und nimmt man fur die untersuchten gesteinsproben etwa an so ergibt sich ein anstieg der hig van bis..
keit durch verbesserung des rmeubergangswiderstandes der fehler wird inner eines messzyklus druckaufgabe und druckentlastung allein durch die fehler der ablesung der registrierten..
fur die in nach dem fehlerfortpflanzungsgesetz fur ein angenommenes von mcal fur ein angenommenes von mcal die fur die messung verwendeten gesteinproben haben einen durchmesser von mm und plattendicke zwischen und io mm..
hart ungeschichtet probe anhydrit hell ungeschichtet..
probe kalkstein probe kalkstein dunkel fast dicht leicht dolomitisch..
probe anhydrit hell ungeschichtet dolomitisch probe anhydrit grau ungeschichtet..
probe kalkstein dunkelgrau hart ungeschichtet anhydritiseh..
probe dolomit gelblich hart schwach..
probe feinsandstein probe violett porlfs schichtung ch dolomitiach..
probe braun fein bis mittelkt rnig schichtung undeut lich eisenschllssig..
probe porphyr hellrosa feinktfrnig hypokristallin splittrig..
probe porphyr hellrosa probe anhydrit hell splittrig ungeschichtet feinkornig splittrig..
fest schwach probe kalkstein dunkel fest dicht..
probe mittelkornig rot stark porbs..
probe dolomit gelblich hart geschichtet probe..
hell splittrig ch probe konglomerat vorwiegend porphyr rotlich..
probe grauwackensandstein dunkel dicht feldspathaltig probe grauwackensandstein dunkel dicht feinkornig..
messergebnisse die proben wurden unter einaxialem druck bis belastet..
urn nicht in den bereich der druck festigkeit der proben kommen..
in den foldenden tabellen vii sind die geordnet nach dargestellt..
die abb einige typische beispiele..
und je nach gesteinsart wobei der schwerpunkt zwischen und ist signifikant grosser als betrlgt liegt..
des meiiberganges bei der messergebnisse die messergebnisse zeigen insgesamt eine deutliche ngigkeit der higkeit..
die mittlere xnderung ftir die verschiedenen gesteine typen ist in abb dargestellt..
die gkeit kann im wesentlichendurch kompressibilitat der meleitfhhigkeit zwei faktoren bestimmt durch die durch die kompressibiiitpt des einschliesslich porenraum..
die den verwendeten rela tiv geringen drucken vernachhtssigt werden..
also die des das porengefrige..
zeigen dass fiir die der gesamtwirmeleitfahigkeit und damit der porenraum und fsiehe hurtig walsh und tectonophysics mcal..
gkeit der eit bei konglomeratproben mcal..
oc druck probe eines gesteins bei druckanstieg praktisch nur der teil des porenraumes der in form schmaler spalte risse..
auftritt die volumenporositat pndert und daher die warmeleitfahigkeit im nur wenig..
und rissen rissporositat crack porosity urn sondern in der regel urn feine und feinste risse kornern intergranulare risse..
in den einzelkornern tectonophysics dolomitproben mcal fcm der van probe probe druck em vi druck cm probe probe probe probe probe..
fig heat conductivity vs uniaxial anhydrite sample..
diese risse werden durch den vollig oder teil an die warmeleitfghigkeit der anteil der volumenporositat etwa konstant bleibt..
der anstieg schon bei geringen einaxialen drticken muss daher im die bzw..
heat conductivity vs uniaxial sandstone sample..
ngi gkeit der konglomerat probe..
heat conductivity vs uniaxial conglomerate sample..
granularen rteeen wird es sich in der regel nicht urn primlr situ..
der der proben entstanden kurven fflr die druckaufgabe..
aus dem gesteineverbatxl und die..
ergeben etch bis auf unter in und beim ziehen tectonophysice..
loo abb ngigkeit der dolomit probe..
heat conductivity vs uniaxial dolomite sample..
heat conductivity vs uniaxial limestone sample..
wenige ausnahmen fllr die untersuchten gesteinsproben schiede..
in der regel liegt die rtickkurve uber der hinkurve..
durch die in signifikante unter tectonophysies..
fig heat conductivity vs uniaxial sample..
viii beziehung zwiechen dem anatieg der eit und der hystereee quarzitisch dolomit anhydrit leitfiihfgkeits uw..
es lassen sich zwei gesteinsgruppen durch ihr unterschiedliches ver halten ca..
anatieg der whrmeleitfwigkeit und einer kleinen porphyre konglomerate und kalksteine..
gesteine mit grfmeseren xnderungen der higkeit und einer betrflchtlichen dolomite sandsteine und anhydrite..
die auftretende hysterese ist ein mass ftir die tion..
die dass die der wprmeleitlllhigkeit unter normalhedfnguagen erhebliche fehler aufweisen men..
die eol then in der begel..
heat conductivity vs uniaxial pressure..
mean values for different types of rocks..
techniques of measuring heat flow on land..
the thermal conductivity or rocks and its dependence upon temperature and composition..
uber die des temperaturleitfahigkeitskoeffizienten in gesteinsproben unter druck forschungsh..
zum problem der anisotropie petrophysikalischer parameter in geologischen pern..
warmeleitftlhigkeit der gesteine bei hohen temperaturen..
physical properties of mohole test site basalt..
effect of pressure and saturating fluid on the thermal conductivity of compact rocks..
introduction two main tectonic processes are generally considered to account for cenozoic continental extension and generation of intraplate basalts in eastern china..
the first is the collision between the india and the eurasia that reactivated many old translithospheric faults and initiated tensile setting in eastern asia..
the second is the subduction of the pacific plate underneath eurasia which may be particularly important to the region surrounding the sea of japan and northeastern china..
in general cenozoic basalts in eastern china show chemical and isotopic systematics similar to those of oceanic island basalts..
and ipb ratios than the northern hemisphere reference line characteristic of the dupal isotope anomaly commonly observed in oceanic basalts of the southern hemisphere..
consequently the continental lithosphetic mantle has been widely suggested as an additional source to the asthenosphere that may be involved in basalt genesis..
proposed that the indiaeurasia collision has played key role in opening of the south china sea ma..
northeastward propagation of this dilational stress created tiffing tectonic regime around the taiwan strait and resulted in the emplacement of intraplate basalts in the fujiantaiwan region..
these basalts display spatial chemical and isotopic variation reflecting interaction between the upwelling asthenosphere and the basal author to whom correspondence should be addressed..
however this tiring ceased with the collision of the luzon arc and the asian continent in taiwan which began at ca..
therefore miocene basalts in northwestern taiwan are particularly important in understanding mantle processes during change of tectonic environment from continental tiffing to arcconfinent collision..
in this paper we report chemical and srndpb isotopic data of miocene basalts in northwestern taiwan with the following to document the temporal and spatial variation in chemical and isotopic compositions of these to characterize the emtype continental lithospheric mantle sources involved in intraplate and to discuss possible processes for the generation of different lithospheric mantle reservoirs and their roles in magma genesis..
samples and analytical methods the active mountain belts in taiwan are created by the collision of the luzon arc and the asian continent..
in northwestern taiwan basaltic rocks occur as lenticular bodies in the neogene continental shelf sedimentary sequences which due to the arccontinent collision have been transported ca..
km from the southeast suppe and emplaced in foldandthrust belt..
two main stages of basalt volcanism are recognized in the early miocene kungkuan stage and the late miocene chiaopanshan stage yen..
in general they are represented by basalt eruptions in the kungkuan ma and kuanhsichutung ma areas respectively..
the kungkuan volcanics consist predominantly of alkali basalts whereas rocks in the kuanhsichutung area comprise variable types including basanite alkali basalt transition basalt tholeiitic basalt and highly potassic basalt..
basalt samples collected from the two areas were first crushed into gravelsize chips..
clean chips were then pulverized in corundum mill for elemental and strontium and neodymium isotopic determinations..
all major and some trace element rb ba nb sr zr sea..
map showing the tectonomagmatic framework of south china and the adjacent region..
black areas mark outcrops of late cenozoic intraplate basalts..
the inset outlines two major locations of miocene basalts in the foldandthrust belt of northwestern taiwan..
ga cu zn ni and cr compositions were determined at the de rennes by xray fluorescence xrf method using philips pw spectrometer..
the other trace element abundances were determined by instrumental neutron activation analyses inaa at the national taiwan university..
analytical uncertainties are generally better than for the xrf and for the inaa methods..
to evaluate the effects of subaerial alteration that may be significant in some fujiantaiwan basalts four kuanhsichutung samples were analyzed before and after acid leaching hci overnight for strontium isotopes..
all acidleached samples have lower ratios and only sample shows decrease in ratio from to..
small chips were used for lead isotope analyses..
they were washed with deionized water several times and then leached with hot hci for about rain before acid dissolution..
most strontium and neodymium isotope ratios were measured by mass spectrometer at academia sinica taipei..
some strontium and neodymium and all lead isotope data were analyzed by finnigan mass spectrometer at the de rennes..
the interlaboratory reproducibility of isotope data and some details of analytical techniques have been discussed by chen..
results and discussions the analytical results are listed in..
the primitive mantle normalized diagram shows that despite the difference in age and rock type the miocene basalts in northwestern taiwan are marked by variable degrees of enrichment of the highly incompatible elements without depletions in the high field strength elements nb and ta..
even for the highly potassic basalt sample no nbta negative anomaly is observed..
in addition alkali basalts from the kungkuan and the kuanhsichutung areas display coherent elemental distribution patterns resembling those of ocean island basalts..
comprehensive discussion on the elemental characteristics of late cenozoic basalts around the taiwan strait is to be given in paper currently in preparation..
emtype isotope signatures in northwestern taiwan basalts the early miocene kungkuan basalts have homogeneous srndpb isotope compositions..
they are isotopically indistinguishable from miocene basalts in the penghu islands situated in the taiwan strait falling in the range of the fujiantaiwan basalts..
their lead isotope ratios display type character and plot above the northern hemisphere reference line with pb and values defined as the vertical deviations for spbp and npb away from the reference hart of and respectively..
on the other hand isotope compositions of the kuanhsichutung basalts are distinct from those of the other fujiantaiwan basalts..
although the sr vs nd data indicate possible type source the lead isotope plots clearly demonstrate that additional mixing of an emltype component is required in magma generation..
these late miocene rocks have even higher pb and pb values of and respectively..
have noted that the fujiantaiwan basalts excluding those occurring in the kuanhsichutung area possess coherent elemental and isotopic characteristics comparable to seamount basalts in the south china sea..
this can be interpreted to mean that insignificant crustal contamination occurred during magma generation and as such the chemical and isotopic compositions of these intraplate basalts may reflect that of the mantle source regions..
together with the east taiwan ophiolite these rocks define binary mixing array best illustrated by the lead isotope compositions..
the east taiwan ophiolite is believed to have originated from the spreading center of the south china sea..
if isotopic compositions of the east taiwan ophiolite are taken as an endmember representative of the depleted asthenosphere the isotope systematics of intraplate basalts in the fujiantaiwan region as well as seamount basalts in the south china sea can be interpreted by mixing with another endmember of type character..
based mainly on strontium and neodymium isotope data an em continental mantle source has been suggested to explain certain volcanics in the northern luzon arc near taiwan..
however more recently combined pbsrnd isotope study argues against this suggestion and favors the involvement of three endmembers in the genesis of these arc rocks..
these are mantle wedge with lead isotope composition similar to the philippine sea basalts subducted terrigenous sediments with an type isotope signature and slabderived fluid component..
as shown in plots of sr and vs ratios the northern luzon arc volcanics exhibit unique vertical trend that can be interpreted by incorporation of the south china sea sediments with type isotope compositions of sr and apb..
on the other hand the kuanhsicbutung basalts delineate distinct array pointing toward the component defined on the basis of oceanic basalts..
these intraplate basalts from northwestern taiwan are the first volcanic group showing an emltype isotope signature in south china and adjacent regions..
origin of the emtype sources considering the absence of mantle plumes and conte nporaneous subduction beneath the presentday south china conmiocene basalts in nw taiwan..
chemical and isotopic composition of miocene basalts nw taiwan ity sample..
ab major dements wt sio tio mno mgo cao..
total trace elements ppm rb ba th nb ta sr..
zr hf ga cu zn sc co ni cr la ce nd sm eu tb yb lu isotope ratios nd pb kungkuan area ma kuanhsichutung area lda ab ab ba ab ab hk tb th th lll rock alkali tramitional highly polassic basalt..
isotope determinations made by at academia sinica taipei and finnigan at the de rermes..
standard errors are as taipei and rennes for fraipei and rerllnes for and less than for all pb isotope ratios..
sr and nd isotopes reported relative to for the bs arid for the la jolla respectively..
pb isotope ratios corrected by per unit mass against the nbs..
sr isotope ratios determined after acid leaching..
tinent geochemical arguments favor that the type isotope signature shared by late cenozoic basalts in this region was derived from the continental lithospheric mantle..
such continental mantle source may have been thermomechanically eroded and mixed into the convecting astbenosphere during extension of the south china continental margin in the late cretaceous..
to explain the spatial chemical and isotopic variation observed in the fujiantaiwan basalts proposed type convecting mantle model in which the with type isotope character were added from the lower part of the lithospheric mantle in the correlation between different radiogeneic isotope ratios suggests that the kuanhsichutung basalts resuited from binary mixing process requiring additional involvement of an emltype component..
the mixing must have taken place rather recently otherwise these linear arrays would have been destroyed or severely degraded by radiogenic isotope growth..
rbbath nbtalacesr ndzrhfsmeuti tb yblu..
spidergrams for the miocene basalts in northwestern taiwan..
sample is representative of the kungkuan basalts whereas the others show different basalt types from the kuanhsichutung area..
the normalizing values for primitive mantle are from sun and mcdonough..
ratios in these basalts indicate timeintegrated low pb and nd ratios in the em ltype source which may represent either an ancient metasomatized lithospheric mantle or lower crustal granulite assemblage ben..
existence of ancient continental lithosphere beneath south china since at least the midproterozoic is consistent with the smnd isotope data for granitoids and metasediments..
however the granulite contribution seems unlikely because the kuanhsichutung basalts have coherent elemental ratios similar to the other fujiantaiwan basalts..
they do not show nbta depletions that are commonly observed in lower crustal lithologies jahn rudnick and presper..
moreover in the kuanhsichutung area basanites and alkali basalts occasionally contain ultramafic xenoliths from the uppermost lithospheric mantle ca..
this reflects rapid magma ascent to crustal levels thus implying little residence time to interact with the lower continental crust..
we therefore suggest that the emltype isotope signature may have been derived from the continental lithospheric mantle..
prior to the cenozoic continental rifting in south china it is generally believed that subduction of the paleopacific plate underneath eurasia may have been major tectonic process over long time period in this region..
the type isotope signature in the continental lithospheric mantle has been considered to be related to suprasubduction processes in the mesozoic..
since south china was fragment rifted from gondwanaland the emtype components both and may have been inherited from this supercontinent..
processes of ancient subduction or plumerelated intraplate magmatism may have imparted emtype signatures into the gondwana lithosphere in the southern hemisphere..
information provided by mantle xenoliths in the late cenozoic basalts can help better constrain the mechanism that metasomatized the continental lithospheric mantle beneath south china..
advocated subductioninduced modification processes in accordance with their argument based on the basalt chemistry to reconcile ion microprobe data for clinopyroxenes in mantle xenoliths from hainan island..
in addition menzies et seamount bwmlts south china sea basalts bulk earth..
plots of vs for miocene basalts in northwestern taiwan..
fields for the east taiwan ophiolite eto seamount basalts from the south china sea and the fujiantaiwan basalts are after chung and sun and and unpubl data..
noted that mantle xenoliths from the same area have elevated thorium and lead abundances thus supporting enrichment related to sediment subduction..
however the subductionrelated metasomatism model appears to be in contradiction with the elemental characteristics of late cenozoic basalts in south china because all these recent basalts lack arclike geochemical features such as nbta depletions..
pb and pb vs diagrams..
data sources are the same as..
two late miocene basalts dotted circle from the chiaopanshan area sun show consistent lead isotope ratios plotting on the trend defined by the kuanhsichutung basalts..
nhrl northern hemisphere reference line..
miocene basalts in nw taiwan..
utuog ii south china sea..
plots of sr and nd vs showing incorporation of two types of enriched mantle reservoirs in the generation of northwestern taiwan basahs..
the vertical isotope field of the northern luzon arc volcanics is also illustrated..
the depleted mantle dmm and enriched mantle and components are taken from zindler and hart although the subductionrelated origin seems unfavored late cretaceous and early tertiary intraplate basaltic rocks emplaced in the fujiantaiwan region do show nbta negative anomalies in mantle normalized diagrams lee..
relevant chemical and isotopic evidence indicates that such distinct feature may have been derived from the continental lithospheric mantle rather than crustal contamination..
it has been suggested that if the continental lithospheric mantle has been previously affected by subductionrelated processes recurrent upward migration of intraplate melts may overprint or even erase the subductionrelated enrichment..
we apply this scenario to the south china continental margin and propose that both types of enriched components em and in the lithospheric mantle could have been produced by subduction zone processes of the gondwana and mesozoic age..
likewise some other mechanisms such as intraplate magmatism may have modified certain geochemical features formed by earlier subduction processes..
involvement of emtype reservoirs in the magma genesis compared with the prevailing type isotope character in south china the paucity of em signature in this region implies the existence of restricted reservoir in the continental lithospheric mantle..
involvement of such continental reservoir in magma generation has resulted in striking change to the isotope composition of miocene basalts in northwestern taiwan..
this change may be attributed to the switch in tectonic environment from extensional to arccontinent collisional regime in the fujiantaiwan region..
the collision resulted in westward cessation of intraplate volcanism around the taiwan strait..
we propose that as for the other fujiantaiwan basalts decompression melting of the convecting mantle intermingling with type..
produced the early miocene alkali basalts in the kungkuan area..
in this model the plum component is suggested to have originated from the basal lithospheric mantle through thermomechanical erosion processes caused by upwelling of the convecting mantie..
since the late miocene collisioninduced compression may have stagnated magma ascent which then heated up and triggered melting of the emltype reservoir located in the lithospheric mantle..
consequently volcanics occurring in the kuanhsichutung area became chemically and isotopically heterogeneous due to various degrees of incorporation of melts generated at shallower levels with emltype isotope character..
broader implication for mantle processes in eastern china similar dynamic processes for magma generation and lithospheric mantle evolution may have taken place in other cenozoic extension provinces in eastern china..
specifically conducted detailed srndpb isotope study on the miocene basalts from the hannuoba area in northern china which are marked by striking chemical and isotopic variations..
these authors proposed that decompression melting of the upwelling asthenospbere resulted in the hannuoba alkali basalts whilst the associated tholeiites resulted from additional melting of an emltype reservoir in the reactivated lithospheric mantle..
such an enriched mantle source is best documented by the quaternary ultrapotassic rocks from the wudalianchi area northeastern china..
these volcanics have the lowest lead and neodymium end isotope ratios among the cenozoic intraplate basalts in eastern china zhang suggesting significant contribution from an ancient metasomatized lithospheric mantle source..
isotopic and elemental data for the basaltborne mantle xenoliths support the idea of presence of emtype reservoirs in the continental lithospheric mantle beneath several extensional regions in eastern china..
regarding eastern china as diverse continental assemblage of stable cratons and younger folded terranes which amalgamated and then underwent complex tectonic history postulated that the lithospheric mantle is hybrid comprising old cratonic nuclei and more recently accreted peridotites with lateral and vertical geochemical variations reflective of modifications by different processes..
and suggested that the dupallike lead isotope feature observed in cenozoic in traplate basalts in eastern china is accompanied by general southward increase in ratio from an emltype to an type composition which they explained as reflecting change of the geotectonic settings across cratonic circumcratonic and oceanic domains..
however this scenario of spatial lead isotope variation is probably false because the em ltype isotope signature prevalent in the north is also recorded by basalts from central china and northwestern taiwan..
since most cenozoic basalts in eastern china show chemical and isotopic characteristics similar to those of oceanic island basalts crustal contamination is generally believed to have played an insignificant role in magma generation..
the geochemical similarity and heterogeneity of these intraplate basalts should link genetically with involvement of the continental lithospheric mantle reservoirs which may have diverse origins and distinct compositions resulting from complex geotectonic histories for the extensional provincecs in eastern china..
introduction approximately half of the heat flow from the continents comes on average from crustal radiogenic heat production heat generated by radiogenic decay of the isotopes and in the upper crust..
crustal radioactivity is laterally heterogeneous however contributing elsevier science publishers from few percent to the surface heat flow in basic terranes to over in some granitic terranes..
heat production must also be vertically if the average surface heat production value of is assumed uniform throughout km of continental crust it would produce mw of surface heat flow approximately the average continental heat flow value..
this result implies no mantle contribution to the surface heat flow an unlikely situation..
for many granitic terranes heat production exceeds gw but surface heat flow is not significantly greater than mw yielding the improbable result of negative mantle heat flux if crustal heat production is vertically uniform..
therefore crustal heat production must decrease with depth in such terranes..
this conclusion is generally consistent with data indicating that most deep crustal rocks have relatively low concentrations of large ion lithophile elements lile including th and..
the form of the decrease in crustal heat production with depth is not known in detail..
possible constraint on the partitioning of mantle heat flow and crustal heat productiongiven by the discovery by francis birch and coworkers of linear relationship between surface heat flow and surface heat production in major silicic plutons in the same tectonothermal province..
this relationship requires that heat production at depth follow some systematic distribution from the surface but the distribution is not defined..
variety of distributions are consistent with the relationship commonly quoted examples of which include linear or exponential decreases in crustal radioactivity with depth and step distributions in which heat production is constant from the surface to an intermediate crustal depth where it decreases to zero..
for the relationship to survive in terranes representing different levels of erosion only an exponential decrease in heat production with depth is theoretically valid..
recent discussion of the linear heat flowheat production relationship has been given by..
it has become common practice in recent years to extend the application and implications of the linear heat flowheat production relationship to highgrade metamorphic terranes..
in general the scatter of the data defining the linear relationship is much larger in provinces consisting of both plutonic and metamorphic data sites or metamorphic sites only than in provinces defined exclusively by silicic plutonic data sites..
this larger scatter in the data could be associated with experimental or sampling error related to the terrane type or perhaps with greater twoor threedimensional heat flow effects in the thermally more heterogeneous highgrade terranes..
alternatively the relationship may only be approximate in highgrade terranes with the intuitive correlation of higher heat flow and higher crystal heat production and impose little or no constraint upon heat production as function of depth..
this latter possibility has significant implications for the extrapolation of geotherms from surface heat flow measurements..
an alternate approach to determining the distribution of heat production with depth is to measure the distribution directly in samples from vertical crosssections of the crust exposed at the surface by tectonism..
such sections have been measured for km originally vertical section of archean granitic crust exposed in the vredefort structure south africa for an unspecified thickness of archean granodioritic rocks in the upturned collar of the sudbury structure in the superior province of ontario canada and for km section of late paleozoic granitic rocks in the pennine basement of the eastern alps tauern window..
all three measured sections indicate general decrease in heat production with depth consistent with but not proving the exponential distribution model..
we report here the first measured heat production profile for more mafic terrane an archean greenstone belt exposed by the kapuskasing structure in the central superior province of the canadian shield..
this profile represents crosssection of the crust below terrane of typically lower heat flow and heat production than the silicic terranes described above..
we examine the redistribution of th and associated with metamorphism up to granulite facies in this terrane and the implications of the profile to the heat flowheat production relationship and the extrapolation of the geotherm to depth in mafic terranes..
geological setting the area studied is in the central superior province of the canadian shield between wawa and foleyet ontario..
here the continuity of eastwest trending sedimentaryvolcanic belts is interrupted by major shear zone and structural break the ivanhoe lake cataclastic zone which juxtaposes highpressure granulite facies rocks of the kapuskasing structural zone..
generalized geological map of the central superior province modified after showing location of study area outlined and superior province diagonal ruling in inset..
numbers and refer to locations of heat flow measurements of and mw respectively with mean site heat production values of and respectively..
ab represents line of section to which sample locations were projected in constructing depth profile of..
against greenschist to amphibolite facies volcanics of the abitibi greenstone belt to the east..
kapuskasing granulites include mafic gneisses in some cases with associated gneissic tonalites commonly with marie and large km anorthosite body the shawmere complex..
peak metamorphic conditions have been estimated at kbar and..
to the there is complex but apparently continuous gradation over about km through amphibolite facies rocks of the wawa dora el gneiss terrane and eventually to greenschist and subgreenschist rocks of the michipicoten greenstone belt..
the domal gneiss terrane consisis mainly of tonalite to granodiorite gneisses with marie and paragneiss xenoliths and later granitic intrusions..
the michipicoten greenstone belt consists of marie and with intercalated graywacke conglomerate iron formation and and may be correlative with the abitibi greenstone belt to the east..
ages of these rock units range between michipicoten..
carbonatite proterozoic massive granite granodiorite tonalite in places with mafic xenoliths..
wawa domal kapuskasing gneiss terrane..
structural abitibi greenstone belt zone..
kilometers shawmere anorthosite complex paragneiss mafic gneiss metavolcanics mainly basaltic..
geological map of the wawa foleyet area showing sample locations..
metamorphic grade increases from greenschist and subgreemehist facies in the michipicoten belt to granulite facies in the kapuskasing structural zone..
the abitibi belt immediately east of the lvanhoe lake cataclastic zone is in amphibolite and greenschist facies..
about and ga but the exact timing and sequence of sedimentation volcanism plutonism deformation and metamorphism have yet to be firmly established..
the geology and geophysics of the area have been interpreted as an oblique crosssection through some km of crust uplifted along major northwestdipping thrust fault represented by the ivanhoe lake cataclastic zone..
this interpretation is supported by seismic reflection profiling which reveals the presence of westdipping reflector in the appropriate position and orientation..
the age of this fault is not well constrained but has been suggested to be midproterozoic on the basis of measurements of cataclastic rocks and ages of possibly associated carbonatite complexes..
this area represents an ideal opportunity for crustal heat production profile because it is relatively accessible and is apparently uninterrupted by major faults thus providing continuous profile into deep continental crust of archean age..
sampling and analytical techniques fifty eight kgsize samples were collected in km transect across the transition from the lowgrade michipicoten greenstone belt to the granulites of the kapuskasing structural zone and from the abititi greenstonegranite belt of the ivanhoe lake cataclastic zone..
sample locations are plotted in..
representative samples were collected from all major rock units established by the mapping of percival..
at localities with complex geological relationships an attemptmade to sample the more silicic units those with higher expected heat production because we wished to assure that these important lithologies were not undersampled..
the sampling biasremoved in calculation of terrane means by weighting according to lithology see below..
samples were carefully trimmed both in the field and laboratory to remove weathering rinds..
thin sections of all samples were prepared to determine their mineralogy texture and extent of weathering and alteration..
the rocks were crushed to fragments less than about mm and analysed for th and concentrations by standard natural gamma techniques using shielded nai crystal photomultiplier tube and pulse height analyser..
samples were counted for an average of about hour with calibration using separate th and standards and composite check standard..
analytical uncertainties are related to counting statistics and leastsquares spectral analysis and the mean standard deviations and ranges of the individual analyses were as th..
repeated analyses of randomly selected samples gave results in agreement with the original analyses to better than..
heat production values were computed from the where is density in gcm and and cth are and th concentrations in ppm and ppm respectively..
an average density of cm used for all lithologies..
the average of standard deviations of individual heat production determinations with range from to..
in addition to the samples collected and analysed here we also utilized data base of major and trace element analyses of metavolcanic rocks from the michipicoten greenstone belt..
results th and abundances calculated heat production values and and ratios for individual samples are given in..
most samples have heat production values less than and the mean heat production of all samples is less than..
latestage granitic rocks show the largest range in th and abundances with heat production values between and..
the heat production values of these samples correlate very well with or th concentration and to much lesser degree with abundance suggesting that the variation is caused by thand urich accessory minerals..
this is supported by petrographic data which indicate higher modal abundances of allanite sphene zircon and apatite in samples with higher heat production values..
accessory mineral abundance also appears to be responsible for the more mod heat production in kapuskasing samples sample description metamorphic th heat production..
no grade ppm ppm wt leucogranite oswald pluton of ilcz avg..
amphibolite abitibi belt paragneiss graphitegranulite bearing mafic volcanic abitibi amphibolite belt of ilcz mafic gneiss granulite..
mafic tonalite gneiss granulite garnetrich mafic tonalite gneiss granulite garnetfree paragneiss granulite..
mafic gneiss granulite mafic gneiss with granulite leucosome banded gneiss granulite tonalite amphibolite gneiss dioritemonzonite floranna complex mafic granulite granulite gneiss garnet bearing tonalite amphibolite avg..
granite tonalite gneiss amphibolite inclusion in paragneiss minus amphibolite leucosome leucosome of paragneiss avg..
tonalite gneiss amphibolite tonalite amphibolite chaplin lake granodiorite mafic xenolith from amphibolite tonalite tonalite gneiss amphibolite layered massive granite avg tonalite amphibolite avg..
flat banded gneiss amphibolite pegmatite bearing continued sample description metamorphic th heat production..
no grade ppm ppm wt tonalite gneiss amphibolite tonalite amphibofite tonalite gneiss amphibolite tonalite gneiss with amphibolite crosscutting granite dike granitic gneiss cataclastic tonalite gneiss amphibolite avg..
mafic gneiss amphibolite tonalite gneiss amphibolite marie volcanic amphibolite..
mafic volcanic greenschist lineated tonafite amphibolite marie sample felsic sample avg..
massive granodiorite tonalite greenschist avg..
sir felsic volcanic greenschist sir felsic volcanic greenschist felsic volcanic greenschist mcleod mine avg..
iron formation greenschist mcleod mine dore conglomerate greenschist mafic tonalite to granulite diorite paragneiss granulite flaser diorite to granulite diorite paragneiss granulite paragneiss granulite leucogranite assoc..
with aplite and pegrnatite foliated mafic tonalite amphibolite unfoliated granodiorite dioritemonzonite tonalite greenschist foliated granodiorite amphibolite anorthosite granulite anorthosite granulite anorthosite granulite est variation in heat production among tonalites and tonalite gneisses..
the textural relationships of these accessory minerals in deformed as well as undeformed silicic plutonic rocks suggest that their variations in abundances are primary igneous feature rather than one produced by metamorphic processes..
there are no correlations between th or abundances or heat production values calculated therefrom or ratios and extent of alteration or retrogression as determined petrographically..
relative abundances of the lithologic types in the kapuskasing crosssection and their average heat production values are given in grouped according to metamorphic grade..
for the amphibolite and granulite terranes the relative abundances of rock types were determined from the aereal distribution of lithologies shown in..
relative abundances of lithologies in the average heat production values in of main lithologic units in the kapuskasing crustal cross section subdivided by metamorphic grade michipicoten greenstone belt iron formation conglomerate granitoid stocks volcanics lreeenriched basalt hreedepleted dacite..
rhyolite mv lreedepleted basalt rhyolite fv dacite rhyolite fv weighted mean amphibolite terrane paragneiss mafic gneiss granites tonalites..
weighted mean granulite terrane tonalite paragneiss and mafic gneiss anorthosite weighted mean btw michipicoten greenstone belt were provided by sylvester personal communication..
when considered on the broad scale the highest weighted mean heat production is present in the wawa domal gneiss terrane amphibolite grade..
this may be explained by the large proportion there of latestage granitoid plutons which have relatively high concentrations of th and..
by contrast the overlying michipicoten greenstone belt has weighted mean average heat production of or about half the value of the amphibolite terrane and the underlying granulite terrane has yet lower weighted mean value of xw..
in order to understand this distribution in more detail we plotted the heat production data for individual samples as crude function of apparent depth by projecting the sample locations to line of section shown in constructed approximately perpendicular to the ivanhoe lake cataclastic zone..
the following observations are of tonalites and tonalite gneisses show relatively restricted range of heat production regardless of metamorphic grade or position within the crustal section..
although the mean heat production value of granulite facies tonalitic rocks is lower than those of amphibolite grade we do not consider this difference to be statistically significant considering both analytical uncertainty and the variations among individual samples..
the mafic rocks and anorthosites have very low heat production values which also exhibit no variations as function of metamorphic grade..
we lack sufficient heat production data for paragneisses to make any conclusions about their correlation with metamorphic grade..
latestage granitoids many of which are undeformed show large variation in heat production..
this we believe is produced by the variable abundances in these rocks of uor thbearing accessory minerals including allanite sphene zircon and apatite..
the igneous textures of these minerals supports this variation as primary rather than metamorphic feature although we cannot rigorously constrain how these variations were produced..
surface wawa domal gneiss terrane amphibofite facies..
abitibi greenstone belt heat production..
plot of heat production in individual samples vs apparent depth as determined by projecting sample locations to line of section ab shown in..
fields for michipicoten metavolcanic rocks are data from..
lithologies are distinguished as stars latestage closed circles tonalites and tonalite mafic metavolcanics and anorthosites others as indicated..
granulite facies rocks have low but significant heat production weighted mean heat production..
this is similar to measurements of many other granulite terranes although some unusual examples greenland brazil have abnormally high heat production..
it has been shown that selective leaching of one or more of the heat producing isotopes may occur during weathering even in apparently fresh samples..
this problem is especially acute with uranium the most soluble of the heat producing elements at low temperatures..
our sample suite shows large range in with mean th mean crustal profiles km kapukasing km canada so..
means and ranges of heat production measurements for the kapuskasing transect compared with data for other crustal profiles and granulite terranes..
data sudbury vredefort kapuskasing this study musgrave strangways amitsoq jequie..
for vredefort number of depth averages given in..
of slightly higher than the expected global mean ratio of..
this could be interpreted to indicate that some of our samples were affected by mobilization..
however the mean mean of our samples is insignificantly lower than the ratio of..
furthermore if uselectively leached from our samples we might expect negative correlation between and heat production..
no such trend is apparent..
we believe therefore that leaching has not substantially affected our samples although the evidence is inconclusive..
in any event recalculation of the heat production of our samples assuming increases the mean heat production only by..
in addition there is no evidence in the kapuskasing profile for selective leaching at different apparent crustal depths so even in the event that we have underestimated heat production due to possible loss the general shape of the kapuskasing radioactivity profile as determined in our study is valid..
plot of heat production vs for samples in tbds study..
the lack of negative correlation argues against selective removal of from the samples during weathering..
redistribution of crustal radioactivity currently popular model for archean crustal genesis involves transport of materials rich in and other elements lile to repositories in the middle and upper crust by processes associated with highgrade metamorphism partial melting metasomatism and fluid migration..
for the kapuskasing crustal profile the heat production data are consistent with the granitoid intrusives in the wawa domal gneiss terrane as having been derived from the sampled kapuskasing granulite terrane thereby enriching the middle parts of the section and slightly depleting the lower parts in heat producing elements..
this implies that transfer of heat producing elements in this case may have taken place by means of silicate melts rather than by aqueous or carbonic fluids..
the lack of substantial depletion of heat production in granulite facies tonalites and tonalitic gneisses compared with those of presumably shallower depth supports the lack of lile transfer by metamorphic fluids..
the kapuskasing profile thus differs from other terranes showing distinct enrichments of lile in amphibolite grade zones relative to lithologically equivalent adjacent granulites..
it seems likely therefore that prior to melt segregation the kapuskasing crustal sectioncharacterized by an approximately uniformly low heat production profile with no significant enrichments or depletions in heat producing elements at least to depth of about km..
although it has been argued that low heat production in some archean terranes such as the superior province is the result of removal of upper crustal enriched zones by erosion this seems highly unlikely explanation for the kapuskasing profile inasmuch as quite shallow levels are preserved in the michipicoten greenstone belt..
comparison to other measured radioactivity profiles the uniformly low radioactivity profile at kapuskasing clearly differs from the pronounced decrease in heat production with depth measured at sudbury vredefort and the eastern alps..
possible implication of this result is that there are fundamental differences in crustal radioactivity profiles between decreasing heat production with depth and more basic constant low heat production with depth terranes..
if this is the case then low heat production terranes may be less susceptible to reactivation than high heat production crust..
geothermal gradients and crustal strength profiles are controlled by upper crustal heat production among other things and may result in stabilization and preservation of basic terranes in the geological record..
intrinsically low heat production therefore may account for the relative abundance of greenstone terranes in mrchean cratons..
implications for the heat flowheat production relationship and geotherm extrapolation data for the archean mafic crustal section exposed by the kapuskasing structural zone do not indicate systematic distribution of heat production with depth..
sites in the lowgrade greenstone terrane would result in an underestimation of the mean thermal contribution in the underlying amphibolites..
sites in the amphibolite terrane would probably yield positive correlation trend between surface heat flow and heat production but variable geometries of the granitic bodies would produce scatter in the correlation..
sites in the granulite terrane would probably be uniformly low plotting as group of uncorrelated points near the heat flow axis of the heat flowheat production plot..
combined with data from high heat production terranes these more mafic terrane data may appear consistent with linear heat flowheat production relationship as the mafic terrane data would plot near the heat flow axis with values close to the reduced heat flow zero heat production..
however this apparent consistency with the relationship is insensitive to the distribution of heat production in the mafic crust and our data indicate heat flow and heat production may be only weakly correlated in mafic terranes..
low but significant heat production in the granulites of the kapuskasing zone has important implications for extrapolation of the geotherm to lower crustal and upper mantle depth..
the concentrations of th and in refractory accessory minerals suggest that small but significant heat production may be common in the deep crust unless depleted by major crustal melting events..
seems to be minimum heat production value for granulite terranes suggesting an immobile component of th and during metamorphism see also and perhaps minimum heat production for the lower crust..
it must be kept in mind however that most granulite terranes including kapuskasing represent crustal depths of km and true lower crust of km depth is rarely if ever available for study..
nonetheless whatever the terrane deep crustal heat production may not decrease below and may make significant contribution to heat flow..
in the heat flowheat production relation separation of the upper crustal heat generation and reduced heat flow components of surface heat flow lower crustal heat production would be represented in the reduced heat flow component and heat flux through the moho could be significantly lower than reduced heat flow..
for example in stable regions the average reduced heat flow is mw km thick would contribute mw to this value yielding mw heat flux through the moho..
similar values have been estimated from empirical heat productionseismic velocity measurements and have been included in some geotherm models the granulite heat production measurements potentially place significant constraint upon this important component of reduced heat flow..
cermak and reported three heat flowheat production data pairs crossing north of the kapuskasing study area from which they calculated reduced heat flow heat flow from below the zone of upper crustal radiogenic element enrichment of mw with depth parameter exponential scaling length for exponential distribution or thickness for step distribution of kin..
our data indicate that the approximate linear heat flowheat production reported by is fortuitous and does not result from systematic distribution of heat production with depth..
heat flow and heat production at the kapuskasing site were mw and btw respectively the heat production being very similar to the mean value of tw..
determined in this study for the kapuskasing granulites..
km thick crust with this heat production would produce mw suggesting heat flow at the moho of about mw similar to the value deduced by cermak and but from very different reasoning cermak and assumed basaltic lower crust underlying an upper crustal layer defined by the apparent linear heat flowheat production relationship..
similar values of heat flow through the moho have been deduced for other stable areas see above and thus it is likely that heat production is approximately uniform through the entire crustal section in this area..
concluding remarks in contrast to the previously reported granitic crustal sections in which heat production appears to decrease roughly exponentially with depth heat production in the km archean crustal section in the kapuskasing area shows no systematic trend with depth..
th and abundances in samples from this section show no distinct correlation with lithology metamorphic grade extent of alteration or retrogression or ratios..
variations in modal abundances of accessory minerals including allanite sphene zircon and apatite appear to be responsible for modest variations in heat production in the more silicic rocks in the this may be primary feature..
the mean heat production for the section of about or less depending upon the weighted mean of exposed rocks types is similar to that of many granulite terranes and there appears to be minimum heat production of inthese granulites that may represent minimum deep crustal heat production..
we emphasize however that crust deeper than about km is not exposed in the kapuskasing profile and we cannot make direct statements about heat production in true lower crust from this data set..
the relatively uniform and low heat production profile measured in the kapuskasing area may be primary feature since there is no evidence for largescale mobilization or removal of lile within the exposed portion of the crustal profile..
this implies fundamental differences in the radioactivity profiles beneath and terranes and may be an important factor in the selective preservation of crust with low heat production in the geologic record..
our data suggest that apparently linear heat flowheat production relationships in terranes such as characterized by the kapuskasing area have no meaning in terms of systematic distribution of heat production with depth characterized by the slope of the relationship..
in these regions crustal thickness may be more important parameter controlling crustal heat production than the slope of the apparently linear relationship..
introduction the variscan orogenesis was characterized by the emplacement of huge volumes of felsic magma of various compositions whose origin is still strongly debated..
references to mesozoic or cenozoic and presentday mountain chains such as the coast range batholith or the himalaya provide neither satisfactory model of tectonic setting nor suitable explanations for the production and emplacement of such huge volumes of granite..
the calcalkaline trend used to characterize magmatic suites or associations is based on specific proportions of gabbrodiorite tonalitegranodiorite and granite in batholith in the active margin batholith of peru these proportions are..
in the variscan batholith of corsica however they are..
such contrasting proportions suggest different sources or melting processes..
furthermore significant outcrops of mgkenriched granitoid or ultrapotassicmafic rocks are found in the southwestern branch of the variscan orogen where they are visible in certain external crystalline massifs of the alps..
similar plutons to the one found in northwestern corsica have been described from other parts of variscan europe the bauon massif southern pagel and leterrier pagel and the bohemian massif but their relationships time of emplacement composition of sources with calcalkaline trends remain to be clarified..
the aim of the present paper is to provide better constraints for genetic model of the variscan batholith found in corsica france and sardinia italy and described by rossi and cocherie..
considering the chemical evolution of the magmas produced in this batholith as well as their isotopic composition it is possible to the various types of magmatic the magmatic the nature of initial the and the existence of any inherited isotopic zonation or heterogeneities..
this should clarify the respective roles played by reworking of continental crust and by input of mantlederived material..
the variscan batholith of corsica was suitable target because of the existence of excellent outcrops of granite and associated mafic rock..
sampling was based on detailed field and petrographic studies by..
geological setting the genesis of mediterranean calcalkalic plutonic associations was first studied in the es and in the corsicansardinian batholith through field work petrography and majorelement geochemistry..
most of this work was centred around two main hypotheses..
the first assumes that mafic and silicic rocks both resulted from the differentiation of mafic magma..
the second hypothesis leterrier debon orsini favours mixing between mantlederived and crustal components and was based on traceelement fourcade and gre and isotopegeochemistry gre and ben othman ben these provided evidence for crustal anatexis in the formation of granitoid rock and for mixing between mantlederived magma and crustal material in the genesis of mafic bodies..
the variscan batholith of corsica consists of plutons with distinct mineralogical and petrographic characteristics..
each unit was studied by the inverse geochemical approach see appendix through trace elements cocherie before using isotope geochemistry..
this ap chemical geology proach favours the observation of data to identify the genetic processes that link the various samples belonging to single unit determining any genetic links between samples and examining the possible relationships between different units..
isotope data then constrain the model especially in the search for source materials..
mineralogical and traceelement study of marie and silicic intrusions into the corsican calcalkaline batholith indicated that granite units represent batches of crustal anatexis..
this work dearly showed that cumulate rocks of the marie suite were produced by fractional crystallization of marie magma of mantle origin..
in addition hybridization phenomena were observed between the two endmembers..
this led rossi and chevremont to qualify such plutonic association as suggesting distinction from calcalkaline rocks related to active margins..
the corsicasardinia batholith resuited from the successive intrusion of three magmatic associations and between middle carboniferous and middle permian times..
summarized mineralogical data on the rocks used for geochemical discussion are given in appendix detailed petrographic and mineralogical data are available in rossi and rossi and cocherie..
the early mgk plutonic association is composed of biotiteamphiboleclinopyroxenekfeldsparmegacrystbearing monzonite to biotitesyenogranite associated with ultrapotassic marie rock that forms of the association..
contacts between marie and silicic mgk rocks are invariably plastic and show the same internal structure..
the mafic bodies generally do not exceed in length and are commonly grouped in swarms..
rare lamprophyre dykes crosscutting the metamorphic basement near intrusions may be related to such ultrak rocks..
the association emplaced with ns foliation trend during horizontal ew shortening of the basement laporte was dated at..
ma by zircon with zu..
geological sketch map of the corsican batholith..
palaeozoic mgk granitoid vertical stripes and ultrapotassic black patches granodiorite and monzogranite oriented crosses indicate trends of flow structures marie and ultramafic volcanic rock andesite dacite and rhyolite alkalic volcanic alkalic plutonic postbatholithic formations..
the ui plutons were intruded by the volcanicplutonic calcalkaline..
the and associations were then both cut by alkaline volcanicplutonic intrusions but these last intrusions will not be discussed here..
the volcanicplutonic association is composed of both mafic and silicic bodies..
plutonic rocks outcrop widely and rare volcanicrock roof pendants in the batholith occur in nw corsica..
intermediate to acidic plutonicrock composition ranges from mafic microgranular enclavebearing granodiorite showing evidence of felsicmafic mingling phenomena to monzogranire and leucomonzogranite associated with ultramafic complexes muc..
intrusions were controlled by nwse structures and gave ages from ma cocherie to ma..
they are crosscut by leucomonzogranite plutons extending over several kilometres and controlled by trending structures with an age of..
marie rocks of the calcalkaline association occur as enclaves septa or ultramafic complexes muc up to km in size and consist of cumulates of peridotitic troctolitic and gabbronoritic noncumulates range in composition from gabbronorite and olivine norite to diorite..
the younger intrusions were dated around ma..
field petrological and geochronological evidence indicates link between plutonic and volcanic rocks the muc being regarded as magma chambers related to andesite..
dacite dated as to ma and with identical geochemical patterns as granodiorite of which it must be considered as the volcanic equivalent was crosscut by leucomonzogranite..
analytical methods major elements were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry icpaes at the..
trace elements including tb were analysed by instrumental neutron activation inaa according to the method described by and using an epithermal neutron flux with cd filter and an irradiation flux of cm..
for the rareearth elements ree apart from tb we used thermal and epithermal neutron flux of cm..
the ree of most samples were determined with radiochemical procedure involving the separation of ree as group after dissolving the irradiated powdered rocks..
all inaa work was done at the siie laboratory cen saclay..
rb and sr isotope data were determined at the caess at rennes..
ages and initial sr ratio calculations assumed an absolute error on measured of much higher than individual analytical errors and relative error on the..
sm and nd isotope data were determined at the university of clermontferrand..
la jolla standard runs gave nd ratio of..
odtans after gas extraction by routine techniques clayton and mayeda..
the average reproducibility of isotope analyses is better than..
singlezircon dating by zem was done on finnigan mat mass spectrometer at..
odtans using an analytical technique described by definition of ui and units using major and trace elements all majorand traceelement analyses of and rocks are available either in and or in..
the cnk ratio of in wholerock acidic samples of both and associations characterizes their slight peraluminous bulk composition..
oxide trends are plotted in they enable fairly clear distinction between and samples except for rock with an content of whose composition is close to minimum melts in the granite system..
it is interesting to note that leucocratic granite has much lower sr and co content than similar ui rock..
moreover the fe content of chemical geology biotite which is lower in than in xf is another effective discriminating criterion rossi and chevremont..
contrasting trends in the lowsilicacontent range of both and units emphasize the role played by mineral fractionation as indicated by textural evidence..
mgk association of rocks major elements display smooth variations that fit rather straight lines in projections suggesting linkage between marie and silicic endmembers..
the fairly constant alkali sum is controlled by both ferromagnesian minerals and kfeldspar whose abundance respectively decreases and increases from the marie to acidic apexes..
covariance of this ratio with ni strongly suggests that enrichment in was primary..
and trends are related to fractionation of accessory minerals such as apatite or titanite..
the ratio in marie rock characterizes highto ultrapotassic compositions..
is richer in alkali mgo and and poorer in cao and than the association and can be compared to classical highk calcalkaline plutonic..
traceelement distribution of the two suites indicates that ui mgk plutonism was characterized by enrichment in transition metals sc cr co ni and by high concentrations of largeion lithophile elements rb cs st ba as well as high contents of elements with small highly charged ions th ta hf zr..
with increasing the association shows strong decrease of so cr co ni st ba hfand zr contents whereas rb and th slightly increase towards the leucocratic facies..
for example the co vs th and sr vs rb variations in clearly indicate the particular location of the corsican mgk field which mostly includes the representative points of mgk bohemian plutonism and is far from the calcalkaline field..
all samples including marie rock exhibit strong ree fractionation..
most patterns have weakly negative eu anomaly..
the total ree content is generally high and decreases from marie to acidic rocks lree ppm with high average value in marie rock ppm and quite average value in mgk granitoid rock ppm..
the more siliceous the samples the more concave are their heavy ree hree distribution patterns..
traceelement data for marie rocks of the ui mgk association show great similarity with data from calcalkaline lamprophyre with high ree rb sr and ba concentrations..
acidic and intermediate rocks granodiorite shows two types of ree pattern with constant zree of more acidic granodiorite has strongly fractionated patterns yb but less than for mgk granitoid rock and no eu anomaly is seen..
more intermediate granodiorite has less fractionated light ree lree patterns more hreeenriched patterns and negative eu anomaly..
less acidic granodiorite has the most pronounced eu anomalies which is unusual compared with the general differentiation trend of granitic magma according to fractional crystallization this point will be discussed in section..
monzogranite shows regular variation in ree distribution as function of content..
the lree patterns are fractionated but no eu anomaly appears for the less siliceous monzogranite see clb this pattern is similar to that of highly siliceous granodiorite see pr and clb..
rather flat ree patterns with low lree and strongly negative eu anomaly characterize leucocratic bodies..
at present most authors cocherie fourcade and gre gromet and silver mittlefehtdt and miller recognize that accessory phases allanites monazites probably trap the lree during late stages of differentiation..
bo bo oo bo bo..
chemical geology major in oxides and traceelement in ppm concentrations in association and metamorphosed rocks of corsica peridotite troctolites gabbros monzogranites pc pc pc pc clb clb clb clb mno mgo cao..
loi total th ta hf zr sc cr..
zn cs rb sr ba la ce nd..
sm eu gd tb tm..
ta hf loi loss on interpolated value of eu..
total fe as bzreetotal ree content with interpolated values..
xx ooo el xx go xx..
plot of some major oxides against..
sources of orsini and this and laporte..
mafic rocks textural evidence of mainly olivine or plagioclase cumulative processes in marie and ultramafic rocks rossi is emphasized by the contrasted disposition of clouds of major oxides with cao indicating the dominant role of plagioclase fractionation..
troctolite shows slightly fractionated pattern with welldeveloped positive eu anomaly at very low concentration levels corresponding to the modal composition of such rock that mainly consists of cumulate plagioclase..
gabbronorite also of cumulative origin has low ree concentrations with very weak positive eu anomaly..
the least differentiated gabbro corresponding to primary magma has higher ree content ppm than the cumulate no or weak negative eu anomaly and slightly lreeenriched patterns and..
the other marie rocks gabbro and diorite are considered as differentiates of this cogenetic suite cocherie they generally show negative eu anomaly and ree enrichment..
however detailed traceelement investigations show exceptions to this general cogenetic evolutionary some rocks of nearly equal initial liquid composition have higher hree contents as well as slight enrichment of other incompatible elements ta..
this may reflect heterogeneity of the mantle source point that will be discussed in more detail in section..
gabbro considered as product of primary melt chemical geology..
logarithmic plot of co ppm against th ppm..
logarithmic plot ofsr ppm against rb ppm..
mgk rock is compared with similar association outcropping in bohemia and with the calcalkaline association from the corsican batholith..
ranges in composition major and trace elements see ree patterns on from basalt to tholeiitic basalt jakes and gill cullers and graf..
traceelement patterns clearly define the various groups of rock defined by field and petrographic studies..
their contrasting distributions do not contradict any hypothesis of formation from different sources for silicic and marie endmember compositions..
however the gap in intermediate composition observed around in and between and in trends is not related to undersampling but could indicate that the end members of each association have different origins..
isotope composition should be useful tool for better definition of possible protolith origin..
isotope data the sr nd and isotope data are listed in..
rbsr isotope data ten monzodioritemonzogranite samples from the mgk association define rbsr wholerock regression line which corresponds to an age of ma and an initial sr ratio of..
in spite of the low mswd the wholerock regression age cannot be considered as the age of the unit since singlezircon dating gives an average age of ma which agrees with field evidence marre and rossi..
the regression line of is considered as mixing line between monzogranite with low..
and younger leucocratic monzogranite that was emplaced somewhat later and has higher..
acidmarie interaction would have given older rbsr ages since the less radiogenic marie components have lower sr and sr initial ratios which means that this type of interaction can be considered as insignificant..
five of the six syenomonzonites plotted on have lower agecorrected ma ratios ranging from to and thus fall below the isochron whereas the sixth plots above it..
this indicates that the marie rock must be considered as noncogenetic with the granite..
twelve monzogranite samples from the calcalkaline association define regression line yielding an age of ma and an initial ratio of..
this age is interpreted as the time of emplacement of the calcalkaline suite and is supported by singlezircon age determination..
the leucocratic monzogranite that crosscuts monzogranite provides another regression line giving younger age of ma and an initial sr ratio of..
singlezircon dating by step chemical geology to iiiiiiiiii..
lace nd smeu tb yblu..
lace nd smeu tb yb lace nd smeugdtboy er yblu..
representative chondritenormalized ree patterns of mgk basic rock syenomonzonite and and monzodiorite to monzogranite..
lace nd smeugdtb yblu lace nd smeugdtb yblu..
representative chondritenormalized ree patterns of the calcalkaline suite..
granodiorite consists of two main groups of one clb pr with no eu anomaly and the other clb clb with negative eu anomaly..
variation from monzogranite to leucocratic monzogranite leads to decreasing lree and increasing hree contents with an increasingly negative eu anomaly..
wise pb evaporation on leucomonzogranite of northern corsica gave an age of ma indicating that emplacement of this huge granite batholith may have taken at least ma..
the representative points samples of granodiorite do not define an isochron as most lie slightly above the monzogranite reference isochron and some have lower..
nevertheless all acidic granitoid rocks display rather constant sr initial ratio around which is significantly less radiogenic than other european hercynian plutonic rocks the es or sardinia cochefie marie rock from the calcalkaline complex is plotted in some plots scatter around the monzogranite reference isochron whereas troctolite and some gabbros are far below it thus chemical geology..
yb lu representative chondritenormalized ree patterns of basic rock associated with the calcalkaline suite..
solid line and full cumulates pc open circles gabbro corresponding to possible initial melt clb gabbro clb and diorite clb corresponding to differentiated double line peridotite pc..
three possible initial melts of gabbroic composition..
indicating different origin for these rocks from that of acidic granitoid rock..
smnd isotope data although two isochrons were obtained using the rbsr method on granitoid rock..
no vs nd isochron can be drawn..
this may be due to an absence of isotopic homogenization of nd isotopes on the scale of the batholith but is also partly due to the relatively young age of the granitoid complex and the narrow range of variation of nd ratios compared to the range of sr ratios..
field relationships and smnd isochron from one of the muc fozzanopeloso led to calculate young ages between and ma which agrees with the zem age determined by..
the data are shown on vs end diagram..
two groups are most samples indicate crustal origin but some marie rocks show mantle affinity..
moreover it is not possible to distinguish between and granitic rocks on such diagram..
oxygen isotope data and rocks give similar sovalues ranging from to..
for and from to for mgk..
for acidic rock these values are slightly lower than those of common rocktypes of the same composition in other variscan intrusions..
rocks show regular increase of from to in marie rock to in granodiorite to in monzogranite and to in leucomonzogranite..
the lack of gap between marie and acidic rocks suggests either cogenetic relationship between marie and silicic rocks the latter deriving from the former or that hybridization processes bridged the gap between each endmember..
the isotope fractionation observed between marie and acidic terms is too large to be only the result of fractional this is clearly shown on where wholerock are plotted against contents used as differentiation index..
the trend is compared to that observed for the oceanic ascension island south atlantic where fractionation trend of is considered as good estimate of isotope behaviour accompanying fractional crystallization..
the difference between these two fractionation trends is too large to be attributed to temperature differences between plutonic and volcanic processes..
these results imply that the association was created by two different magma batches..
the high of some marie rock samples to are explained by isotopic contamination of marie magma by crustal indeed marie rock occurs as enclaves within acidic plutons and granodiorite shows evidence of magmatic interaction giving rather low aovalues to..
the nature of the interaction processes will be discussed in section the isotopic composition ofsr nd and and concentrations ofrb sr sm and nd in the variscan calcalkaline rocks of western corsica and in the variscan highmgk granitoids and associated marie rocks age ma sample rb sr sr..
sr sm nd nd sr..
tdm ppm ppm ppm ppm vs smow..
scan calcalkaline rocks of western granodioritesl assumed ma pr pr pr pr granodiorites assumed ma clb clb clb pv monzogranites age ma..
clb clb clb clb clb clb leucocratic monzogranites age ma clb clb clb clb clb clb clb clb mafic suite assumed age ma pc pc pc lm clb clb clb pv..
pi clb clb clb clb clb clb clb..
oo oo continued sample rb sr sr..
variscan highmgk granitoids and associated mafic rocks age ma..
error in the measurements are better than..
parameters used for calculation of nd depleted mantle model ages and for ekd nd jacobsen and wasserburg nd nua jacobsen and wasserburg tdm has been calculated according to depaolo..
pc pc pc lm pv..
clb clb chemical geology sr sr..
the mgk association does not show the same regular trend as the calcalkaline composite association within ui the of syenomonzonite ranges from to but the values for monzodiorite and monzogranite to overlap with those of syenomonzonite..
with the exception of contaminated and hybridized samples the marie rock in both and has low jlsovalues to to that are typical of mantle origin..
variscan marie plutonic rocks from previous studies show higher values for such rock..
similarly the leucomonzogranite has narrow range of aovalues to oo that is significantly lower than that of variscan twomica granites..
shows different trends for sr and isotope data..
trend differentiation may correspond to fractional crystallization of an acidic magma of monzogranitic composition and trend..
mixing mainly corresponds to marie rock..
both trends show an increase of the initial sr ratio as well as increasing sovalues which indicates crustal contamination with possible assimilation during fractional crystallization of mantlederived magma or direct acidbasic hybridization..
this underlines the narrow range of variation in iso sr vs sr plots of corsican variscan granitoid rocks..
rbsr isochron for the mgk suite using only granite samples open diamonds..
basic rocks solid diamonds do not define an isochron..
no isochron can be drawn for granodiorite of the association..
two groups of rocks are one with narrow range in variation of sr ratios defining correlation line with an indicative age ma the other composed of three samples falling above the reference isochron ma could represent mixing line see text for discussion..
distribution of basic rock of the association in the rbsr diagram compared to the monzogranite reference isochron..
isochrons for granitoid rock are from chemical geology..
ena end at the assumed age against the initial sr..
most points cluster round ena and sr..
five mafic rocks plot near the..
despite assimilation or contamination the corresponding magmas show mantle origin..
the sr ratio of the has been calculated at an age of ma using presentday sr isotope composition of and sr ratio of..
pyrenean data are from ben for the rigut and from for the trois seigneurs plutons..
wholerock sovalues vs content for calcalkaline rocks association from corsica..
the evolution trend of ascension volcanic rocks is plotted for comparison..
tope data for all rock types and the contrasting values for corsican and pyrenean granitoid rocks..
thus large mantle contribution to mafic magma is much more evident for corsica than for the es where the trend does not extrapolate to an endmember with mantletype values..
isotope data indicate that in and uz the mafic rocks are mantlederived and acidic rocks are crustalderived from source with the same isotope composition..
intermediate granodiorite could be the result of mixing processes..
thus in the southern variscan realm clear isotopic zonation appears from corsica to the es whose origin will be discussed in further section..
the mgk association let us consider for the association the genetic relationships between various magmas the processes involved see appendix and the characteristics and origin of the primary liquids..
several questions arise concerning these comag chemical geology..
sro diagram for all analysed rocks same symbols as in the marie suite indicates mantle affinity although crustal contamination trend cm appears the large arrow corresponds to the evolution of mafic rock from corsica showing general trend of mixingcontamination from an initial magma of mantle origin note the narrow isotopic range of variation for the granite with weak increase for the most differentiated rocks trend..
and correspond to typical granite and associated marie rock respectively from the nres..
matic acid and marie rocks and cocherie do genetic links exist between all mgk rocks as suggested by chemical mineral data but ruled out by isotope..
what if any is the magmatic process that can lead to the association of rocks described..
is it possible to identify the source of the initial magma and if not what are the..
majorand traceelement data indicate similar geochemical characteristics for all rocks of the mgk association high mg co cr and ni concentrations high contents of incompatible elements rb lree th zr hf etc and rather strong ree fractionation without large eu anomalies..
decreasing ree contents correlate with increasing content..
mineral composition varies only slightly from marie to felsic rocktypes..
all these facts point at genetic link between all ui rocks including the mafic ones..
however isotope data rule out such genetic on the rbsr isochron diagram the ultrak mafic rocks do not plot on the isochron line drawn using only the acidic rocks the marie rocks define linear correlation that intersects the most representative points plot under the isochron but one is located above it..
this marie correlation line can be interpreted as mixing line between mantle endmember and crustal component that is distinct from the felsic mgksuite protolith..
smnd data lead to the same conclusion..
the end of felsic rock has narrow range of variation to whereas the end of maric rock ranges from to suggesting mixing between mantlederived material and crustal component different from the crustal source of felsic magma..
for two monzogranites the values are and..
the lower value sample is thought to indicate isotopic disequilibrium or nonmagmatic equilibrium temperature but mineralogical studies point at an equilibrium..
values of mgk mafic rock are below providing evidence for the noncogenetic character of mafic and felsic rocks in the ui mgk association..
isotope data distinguish at least two groups of samples on each side of the compositional gap seen in harker projections..
the gap for acid rock yields rbsr mixing line whereas the other group mainly composed of marie rock gives scattered isotope values..
the sr and nd isotope characteristics of all mgk granites ranging from monzodiorite to leucosyenogranite indicate possible cogenetic suite which will be tested by traceelement calculations..
ultrak mafic rocks the data points of mafic mgk rocks are scattered in both rbsrisochron and srnd diagrams suggesting mixing process between two endmembers consisting of mantlederived material and crustal component..
according to isotope data the crustal component appears to be and compared to mgk granite..
the crustal endmember did not contribute to the magma that gave rise to the mgk acidic rocks..
additional evidence is provided by the ree pattern of sample which appears to be the most contaminated sample with respect to sr and nd isotopes..
its ree fractionation is similar to that of normal detrital sedimentary rock wildeman and haskin and different from that of mgk granite and which shows greater hree fractionation..
the and the yb ratios vary as function of the importance of the crustal component as shown on the rbsr isochron they decrease with increasing sri and with decreasing nd..
in other words the high and lree contents seem characteristic of primary mantlederived magma but not of crustal component..
already suggested that magma mixing or assimilation of silicarich crustal material is not the cause of enrichment in igneous rocks..
spiderdiagram plot of the ultrak rocks identified them as lamprophyre..
also questioned the origin of such highly potassic mantlederived at present several models have been proposed high degree of crystal fractionation hara and yoder zone refining harris neal and davidson an extremely small degree of partial melting of garnetperidotite mantle material sun and hanson fusion of metasomatized mantle source mitchell and bell hawkesworth and vollmer wass and rogers windom and boettcher or leaching of wall rock and enrichment of incompatible elements during ascent of the melt..
finally mckenzie has proposed that melt fractions as small as can separate from mantie the metasomatized layer in which small melt fractions accumulate remelts at low temperature either through adiabatic decompression when crust is stretched or through temperature increase caused by hot plume giving strongly potassic magma..
uta lacesr ndsmzrhf euti tbyb..
traceelement abundance in gabbro samples and clb representative of primitive mafic magmas associated with and granite respectively..
primitive mantle normalizing values are from sun and mcdonough..
the sequence of elements is based on the order of decreasing incompatibility in oceanic basalts..
data are compared to values for average nmorb and emorb sun and mcdonough and average calcalkaline lamprophyre estimated by rock..
in our opinion it is difficult to imagine that fluids can act as carrier for various chemical elements lree rb cs zr hf th ta sr and ba..
as proposed by we consider that if metasomatic fluids really are involved their major role would be to favour the melting process without producing extensive change in the general chemistry of melt products..
the production of ultrak mafic rock from zonerefining process fits well with traceelement and isotope data from corsican mafic rocks..
during the first hypothetical stage phlogopite garnet bearing source melts at depth..
the rising magma induces zonerefining process in the traversed mantle leading to significant increase of incompatibleelement contents whereas the isotopic characteristics of the melt remain of mantle affinity chemical geology despite the increase in sr and nd concentrations..
in second stage this enriched magma interacts with the base of the crust leading to lower yb higher sr and lower nd ratios..
interaction contamination or assimilation during crystal fractionation with the associated mgk felsic rock does not seem to be the major process involved..
fractional crystallization of acidic rocks discussion of the relationships between mgk granites using traceelement data first needs identification of the magmatic process involved after which the petrogenetic model mineral proportions in equilibrium with liquid rate of evolution of the magmatic process is quantified using traceelement and especially ree patterns..
the last in all mgkgranites are strongly fractionated compared to talcalkaline monzogranite..
as increases zree decreases from to ppm as do sr and ba contents whereas the eu anomaly is fairly constant as is the rb content at around ppm..
using loglog diagrams co vs th or sr vs and it can be seen that compatibleelement concentrations co sr decrease sharply while incompatible elements th rb increase only moderately..
these data agree with fractional crystallization from monzodioritic to leucosyenogranitic magma rather than magma mixing or partial melting..
in five ree la sm eu tb yb and ba and rb have been plotted against sr on loglog scale..
except for yb the correlations are fairly good with an average correlation coefficient of..
this provides additional evidence for fractional crystallization as the main process for explaining the geochemical trend from monzonitic to syenogranitic compositions..
the correlations also indicate that distribution coefficients remain constant suggesting as first approximation that the proportions of crystallizing solid phases are not greatly modified during magmatic evolution..
using simultaneous modelling of ree rb sr and ba we can test the fractional crystallization model for ree after which we try to identify the mineral proportions of cumulate phases and calculate the extent of the fractional crystallization process..
our calculated concentrations ofrb sr and ba in the evolving liquid fit well with the analysed samples heavy line in using and for biotite plagioclase and kfeldspar respectively..
on the other hand it is well known that ree are also controlled by amphibole and accessory apatite zircon auanite titanite etc in our case we saw that titanite also plays an important role during crystallization..
calculated ree concentrations obtained with of amphibole and of titanite lead to ree patterns that are very similar to the experimental data of and initial concentrations in the primitive liquid of monzodioritic composition lo in were selected using the correlation diagrams of..
the traceelement content of the initial liquid of monzodioritic composition now has been well defined and supported by isotope data will be used to study the origin of primary acidic magmas..
magma mixing in the association..
summarizing the geochemical and mineral chemical data on rocks leads to the existence of maficfelsic interaction within the association leading to rock of intermediate composition is supported by field evidence of mixing processes and by the occurrence of microgranular marie enclaves of ultrapotassic composition in monzonite to monzogranodiorite..
however the isotope data suggest gap mantlederived ultrapotassic marie and felsic magma of crustal origin showing no significant interaction with the marie magma..
marie rock about forty marie samples belonging to the calcalkaline association were collected in var chemical geology..
plots of ree rb and ba against sr on loglog scale for highmgk granite..
calculated correlation lines fine lines are shown suggesting onestage crystallization process..
note that only rb behaves as an incompatible element whereas all others decrease with increasing crystallization..
the heavy lines obtained from the calculated model fit well with the fine statistical lines..
calculated ree patterns for mgk granite..
ree concentrations of the initial liquid have been graphically estimated with the loglog diagrams of..
ious locations muc ofpila canale levie roccapina or smaller mafic septa..
all samples were analysed for major and trace elements and also ree but at the time it was unclear whether there were several mantle or crustal sources..
the inverse geochemical method appendix using traceelement data in loglog diagrams cocherie has demonstrated that most of this variation can result from fractional crystallization as the points representative of liquids fall near straight line characteristic of such process..
methods for graphic determination of bulkdistribution coefficients for compatible cr ni and incompatible or hygromagmatophile rb cs ta hf th la elements are described elsewhere cocherie using the covariance between the fourteen possible pairs of elements..
one muc pila canale was selected for quantitative study because of its large size and wide variety of composition ranging from troctolite to diorite and ten of such samples plot on straight line on log log ta diagram..
they range in composition from gabbro to diorite and show no cumulative however troctolite has cumulative textures and may be considered as pure cumulate..
three samples plot close to the cumulative line..
considering their texture and location in the diagram we consider them as cumulates in equilibrium with fractionated to highly fractionated liquids..
other points not plotted on scattered between the cumulative and liquidevolution lines are con chemical geology traceelement model calculations with fractional crystallization using primitive liquid of monzodioritic composition to produce the ui mgk association kd lo lt plagiokfeldbioamphititaclase spar rite bole nite rb sr ba la ce nd sm eu gd tb..
kd individual partition coefficients for the studied elements were empirically determined by measuring of concentrations in separated biotites amphiboles and plagioclases as well as concentrations in whole rocks..
calcalkaline granitoid association was used ranging in composition from diorite to granodiorite..
values in brackets are from arth..
dcalculated bulk distribution coefficients using the respective proportions of crystallizing plagioclase kfeldspar biotite amphibole and titanite..
initial concentration in primitive monzodiorite inferred from correlation diagrams of..
li liquid concentrations according to the rayleigh distillation law lo for and respectively..
these concentrations can be compared with the sample concentrations listed in..
sidered as mixing of melt and cumulate..
accessory minerals chromite can play major role in cr and ni concentration..
this role is taken into consideration by the inverse geochemical approach without any hypothesis on bulkdistribution coefficients and phases in equilibrium with the liquid..
knowledge of the bulk dvalues for rb cs la th ta hf ni and cr as well as their concentrations in less and more differentiated melts enables calculation of the degree of fractional crystallization..
in this example the mean of nine calculated fvalues is which corresponds to high degree of crystallization of..
this means that the cumulates remained in equilibrium with the evolving melt and that the liquids in question are cogenetic..
the initial melt is thus clearly identified..
test of this model is based on conventional ree systematics..
ree concentrations of the various possible melts are calculated by using the previously determined fractionalcrystallization model rayleigh distillation law and the known ree contents of the identified pure cumulates..
this identifies the ree content of the initial liquid and evaluates its degree of fractional crystallization in order to compare it to the value calculated with loglog diagrams..
note that such calculations do not require knowledge of partition coefficients as the analysed cumulates are assumed to be representative of the instantaneous solid phases in equilibrium with the evolving liquids..
according to three kinds of cumulates can be troctolite with very low hygromagmatophileelement contents and transitionelement enrichment gabbronorite and gabbro with lower transitionmetal contents..
one representative sample of each of the different cumulates has been selected pc and chemical geology..
logarithmic plot of ni against ta of basic rock associated with the association in the variscan batholith of corsica..
two trends can be open symbols correspond to rock representative of melt the pila canale is taken as an example solid symbols represent cumulates..
many cumulate rocks plot between the two trends as they are composed of cumulate minerals and interstitial minerals representative of the melt in equilibrium..
the corresponding ree patterns are plotted in threestage fractionalcrystallization model according to the rayleigh law is summarized in..
the resulting bulk value of the most evolved liquid which corresponds to crystallization index of..
the calculated initial liquid lo fits particularly well with the composition of gabbro such as clb considered by rossi as possible initial melt on the basis of field and petrological data..
the calculated crystallization index of is close to the value of previously determined from other trace elements using the inverse approach see above..
ree calculations and the loglog diagram demonstrate that the mafic rock can be regarded as suite that evolved according to fractionalcrystallization process..
sr and nd isotopes however show heterogeneous values of and to from gabbro or troctolite to diorite and..
this could suggest an fractionalcrystallization process afc but the ree content of diorite clb is too high compared to that of granite and to be considered as result of such an afc process..
similarly sri is higher and lower than that of granite..
so if an afc process is involved the assimilated material did not derive from the associated granite magma..
we think that crustal fluids interacted with the mafic magma during fractional crystallization..
thus the first solidified liquid gabbro and the primitive cumulate troctolite have almost retained their primitive isotopic character but the most evolved magma diorite interacted during much longer period with crustal fluids..
nevertheless this kind of interaction does not seem to have disturbed majorand traceelement geochemistry..
origin of mafic rocks the points of interest for mafic rock of the calcalkaline association its origin the nature of its source material the degree of homogeneity of such source material and if possible the tectonic environment during the time of magma emplacement..
scheme for threestage fractionalcrystallization model liquid lo di ll ft cumulates..
gabbronorite gabbro diorite clb chemical geology..
ree calculated for liquids lo of the mafic suite according to fractional crystallization model ll si dl lo clb clb pc la ce nd sm eu gd tb yb lu..
the calculated lovalues are compared to the analysed rock clb see text for explanations..
interpolated values are in brackets traceelement calculations using nonmodal batch partial melting model shaw to produce mantlederived liquids corresponding to the mafic suite kd mauna loa lo amphibole spinel mantle flow clb lherzolite iherzolite shaw olivclinoorthoamphispinel ine pyroxpyroxbole ene ene rb sr ba la ce nd sm eu gd..
tb yb lu partition coefficients from arth except extrapolated values in brackets and those concerning spinel from kay and gast..
mauna basalt from hawaii flow..
clb sample from corsican mafic suite representative of primitive liquid..
calculated traceelement concentrations in mantle containing amphibole opx cpx amph..
the solid phases involved in the melt opx and amph..
traceelement concentrations in mantle containing spinel opx cpx sp the solid phases contributing to the melt opx and cpx..
mantle concentrations from shaw are taken as reference..
as shown before the srndoisotope data of some mafic rocks clearly indicate juvenile origin at the time of the batholith formation sr nd to..
similarly in the age corrected vs nd diagram the less contaminated mafic samples plot not far from the mantle reference field..
from an isotopic point of view it is impossible to choose between juvenile lowercrustal material and direct partial melting of the mantle as possible sources..
the first alternative can be rejected if we consider traceelement data chemical geology fractional crystallization model for calculated traceelement composition in primitive liquids of monzogranitic composition kd lo dl ll ci clb plagiokfeldmona clase spar zite rb sr ba la ce nd sm eu gd tb yb lu kd partition coefficients those for plagioclase and kfeldspar are taken from arth those for monazite correspond to the ratio of analysed monazites found in the leucocratic monzogranites la ce sm eu tb yb ppm and the average content of ten whole rocks..
values in brackets are extrapolated..
lo clb analysed monzogranite taken as the primitive monzogranitic liquid..
calculated bulk distribution coefficients using the respective proportions of crystallizing plagioclase kfeldspar and monazite..
calculated bulk distribution coefficients using the respective proportions of crystallizing plagioclase kfeldspar and monazite..
li and are the two corresponding liquids calculated according to the rayleigh distillation law..
using the calculated distribution coefficients and with fi and..
this twostage model leads to bulk crystallization index of..
the li and calculated concentrations fit well with the average concentrations cl and measured on differentiated monzogranites samples and leucocratic monzogranites samples respectively and respec..
of the initial liquid clb its low rb content ppm and the low ree contents and with slightly fractionated ree pattern from la to lu chondrite to chondrite twostage model involving partial melting of the mantle followed by second partial melting of this now solidified melt would give much higher incompatibleelement concentrations..
several types of peridotite mantle source can be considered..
the partial melting of garnetlherzolite can easily be rejected in view of the experimentally determined ree patterns of initial liquids and the calculated pattern of the initial liquid because garnet residue of partial melting would lead to liquids with hreedepleted patterns..
furthermore experimental work by green showed that tholeiitic basalt cannot be formed in equilibrium with residual garnet..
two other mantlesource assemblages are more likely to give liquid of tholeiitic or calcalkaline composition amphibole lherzolite and spinel lherzolite..
the clb gabbro is taken as representative primary..
both types of source assemblage were tested to calculate the ree rb sr and ba contents of possible mantle instead of assuming chondritic abundance for trace elements in the mantle and calculating the possible primary magma..
both melting of amphibole lherzolite and of spinel lherzolite are appropriate in that their calculation of traceelement concentrations leads to rather fiat ree patterns chondrite and rb sr and ba values that are compatible with mantle material shaw..
this means that traceelement data alone do not suffice for choosing between these two mantle source assemblages..
the large variation in hree contents of the three samples plotted in is chemical geology..
considered to be caused by mantle heterogeneity for hree..
using geochemical data we can compare the marie rocks with presentday or recent volcanism..
they resemble tholeiitic islandarc basalt from the western sunda volcanic arc of indonesia the contents are very similar but ree patterns are flatter in islandarc rocks than in our case..
the ta ratio another useful geochemical tool remains constant during magmatic fusion and crystallization as these two incompatible elements have similar behaviour..
this ratio can thus be used to characterize both source materials and tectonic environment of the magmarie process..
gabbro identified as clb has low ta ratio which is typical of extensional tectonic areas spreading ridges or intraplate magmatism..
however higher ta ratios of are thought to be related to convergentplate tectonic environments subduction zones..
studied tholeiitic basalt dredged from the midatlantic ridge at..
that is very similar to our basic rocks..
their tholeiitic basalt is also enriched in incompatible trace elements compared to tholeiitic midocean ridge basalt morb and is associated with alkali olivine basalt..
both are regarded as the result of vertical heterogeneities in mantle composition..
tholeiitic oceanisland basalt from the eruption ofmauna loa in hawaii shows the same incompatibleelement abundances..
according to the thhfta diagram of marie rock may be analogous to enriched morb..
in summary the data indicate the absence of subduction zone in the tectonic environment of uz marie plutonism which agrees with palinspastic reconstructions..
the rock of tholeiitic composition enriched in incompatible elements with regard to oceanfloor basalt can be compared to etype morb or oceanisland basalt produced by nonmodal partial melting of heterogeneous mantle of spinel or amphibole peridotite without garnet under conditions of asthenospheric ascent..
monzogranite and leucomonzogranite granitic rocks in contrast with the mafic suite show no characteristic trend in loglog diagrams..
several explanations are the various granite bodies are not genetically linked even though isotope data indicate cogenetic differentiation due to an unidentified magmatic process is rather poor and interelement diagrams show clustering of representative points although the isochron indicates rather large interval of ree th ta rb cs etc are much less incompatible in acidic melts than in basic ones which means that dvalues approach or exceed and compatible elements cr ni co sc etc also have dvalues close to..
thus even with high degree of differentiation and regardless of the magmatic process the variations in concentration will be slight..
nevertheless several geochemical arguments indicate that monzogranite and leucomonzogranite derived from the same using the loglog diagrams log sr log rb general negative trend is observed with strongly decreasing compatibleelement contents associated with rather moderate increase of incompatibleelement contents..
this is typical variation trend for such element pairs during fractional crystallization of magmatic suite..
the homogeneous sr and nd isotope sri end to and the that increase from to are acceptable for suite of rocks related through high degrees of fractional crystallization le taylor and sheppard..
the degree ofree fractionation varies from highly lreeenriched patterns without eu anomalies for rock with clb to leucomonzogranite with fiat normalized patterns and huge negative eu anomalies..
the decrease of sr and eu concentrations related to an increasing content suggests an important role of feldspar during magmatic differentiation of the initial monzogranitic melt chemical geology to..
calculated ree patterns for calcalkaline granite..
twostage fractional crystallization model involving feldspar and monazite fits well with the data..
the decrease of ba associated with increasing concentration of rb and cs implies the crystallization of kfeldspar without mica..
the large increase of hree concentrations also needs quartz crystallization in order to reduce the hree bulk distribution coefficients..
thus the primitive monzogranitic melt would appear to have had composition close to that of granite..
crystallization of the major phases qz and kfs was not sufficient to account for the lree therefore we must consider that accessory lreeenriched phases allanite monazite etc accompanied the major phases..
such accessories act as trap for lree leading to decreasing lree content with increasing crystallization index..
twostage fractional crystallization model involving rb st ba and ree concentrations is used to compare the calculated concentrations of residual liquids with the observed concentrations in calcalkaline granite..
the direct calculation method used for our work needs estimates of the following parameters monzogranite selected as primitive liquid clb shows the lowest content and the weakest negative eu anomaly compared with other and in order to calculate bulk distribution coefficients individual partition coefficients are needed for each mineral involved in magmatic differentiation..
it can be seen that the calculated liquid concentrations obtained at the first stage li are close to average concentrations sampies of the most differentiated monzogranites increase of rb and hree and decrease of sr ba eu and lree compared to primitive monzogranite..
the second stage leading to the leucocratic liquid is compared to the average of leucocratic monzogranite samples..
the previous trend of traceelement contents is confirmed by calculated ree patterns..
the monzograniteleucomonzogranite association can be considered as suite which evolved according to fractionalcrystallization model from an initial liquid of monzogranitic composition..
granodiorite as byproduct of magma mixing deciphering the origin of rocks of intermediate composition granodiorite bridging the gap between mafic and acidic endmembers is crucial for interpreting the genesis of any calcalkaline association..
isotope data from mafic rocks show an origin that is mainly mantlederived magma and acidic crustalderived material..
the existence of statistical gap from to in trends corresponding to granodioritic composition emphasizes the key place of such rocks in the interpretation of plutonic association..
acidicmafic mingling zones in granodiorite were observed in the field in corsica orsini rossi whereas mingling and mixing were studied in sardinia by who concluded that the origin of microgranular mafic enclaves in granodiorite must be sought in mixing between mafic and silicic magmas..
as discussed before such suite of rocks of intermediate composition is characterized by strong geochemical heterogeneity..
it is essential that nature and origin of the mixing batches are defined as accurately as possible in order to place constraints on the genesis of rocks of intermediate composition in the chemical geology association..
the corsican example is well suited for this purpose because of good exposures of both monzogranite and mafic rock which permit detailed investigations into the nature of possible an endmembers..
the use of traceelement loglog diagrams th rb when looking for relationships between monzogranite and granodiorite is ruled out by the tight clustering of representative points..
in vs sr diagram the granodiorite points do not fit along single isochron line..
nevertheless two groups of rocks can be first group roughly plots above the reference isochron of monzogranite with slightly higher model sr initial ratios instead of and the second group of three rocks clb plots on straight line with much lower sr initial ratio and an older age which is inconsistent with field relationships..
the first trend defined by granodiorite with representative points close to the monzogranite isochron has high sio and traceelement contents ree of clb which make them not so different from the primitive monzogranitic liquid..
both shape no eu anomaly and level of ree abundance are similar to those of less differentiated monzogranite clb..
the second group has less acidic geochemical characteristics and specific ree patterns clb it shows higher hree contents and pronounced negative eu anomaly typical of highly differentiated rocks..
the major traceelement and sr isotope features together provide picture that is inconsistent with direct common origin for these two groups of granodiorite..
the second group with its older and low model sr initial ratio may be interpreted as result of mixing between mafic and silicic endmembers..
sr vs sr plot for the calcalkaline association same symbols as in..
two groups of rocks of granodioritic composition appear..
one group represented mainly by samples and plots along mixing line between two endmembers differentiated basic rock and the crystallizing monzogranitic melt leading to mixing pseudoisochron..
the second group consists of samples clustered near the less differentiated monzogranite defining fractional crystallization trend in agreement with the calculated isochron at ma..
plot of co against zr for the association showing the mixing trend of some granodiorite with monzogranite and highly differentiated magmas..
to test such hypothesis and when the sr initial ratios of the endmembers are not very far apart we prefer to use the sr presentday vs sr diagram which yields mixing line when samples are linked by mixing process bernardgriffiths scharbert..
this provides curve for suite of rocks evolving by differentiation..
we must emphasize that this test cannot be used if the rb content remains constant for the entire rock suite in which case this plot will be mathematically straight line..
in our case the rb concentrations increase according to the sequence from dioritic to monzogranitic clb and..
shows how the representative points of the second group of granodiorites clb yielding pseudoisochron give mixing line between two endmembers the narrow field of mafic rocks and that of differentiated monzogranitic magma corresponding to the highest sr ratios of the isochron..
note that the representative points of the first granodiorite group define small field close to the beginning of the fractionalcrystallization trend of monzogranite confirming the great similarity between this group of granodiorites and the less differentiated monzogranite..
another test involving simple binary diagram can be used requiring only those elements that show large variations in in this case the mixing of two magmas leads to straight line whereas various different types of curve may be obtained according to the particular magmatic process involved..
such variation diagrams using ba or zr show that granodioritic magma is the result of mixing process between the most differentiated melts of the associated mafic suite and the monzogranitic magma at the end of its first differentiation stage before the leucomonzogranitic stage..
field and structural considerations indicate that the two granodiorite groups could not have been different intrusive they have comparable chemical mineral composition with similar styles of textural disequilibrium and both groups contain microgranular mafic enclaves interpreted as quenched inclusions of mafic magma that suffered extensive disaggregation and reequilibration..
the first group which plots close to the monzogranite reference isochron shows slight contamination by mafic magma but has acquired isotopic homogeneity and plots in field of traceelement composition close to that of monzogranite..
the second group did not achieve isotope homogeneity and the amount of mafic material involved is significant..
both groups appear to have been batches of magma that chilled at slightly different stages of mixing within the same intrusive unit..
origin of primary felsic magmas..
the source of granite the sr ratios and end and values that are very similar for ui and granitoidrock compositions and indicate single source but raise the question of how chemical geology oj..
calculated ree patterns for granitoid rock according to nonmodal batch partialmelting model with..
the initialsolid source has graywacke composition..
two different liquids are obtained as function of metamorphic high mgk liquid in the granulite and calcalkaline liquid under high pmo conditions..
calculated ree patterns are compared to the initial liquid lo and the analysed rock sample clb..
some corsican granulitic paragneiss could be regarded as representative of possible protolith..
to obtain such different magmas from the same solid source..
the present idea is that during partial melting the traceelement content of the resuiting magma will strongly depend on the percentage of some residual phase feldspar for sr biotite for rb amphibole and garnet for ree..
two very similar solid sources or single one could successively undergo two metamorphic events one at high pressure and low and the second under more hydrous conditions..
winkler as well as arth and hanson showed that granite melts can be produced by partial melting of graywacketype rock..
precambrian wildeman and haskin arth and hanson and archaean wildeman and condie..
graywackes were analysed for ree..
the lree of such rocks can vary from to ppm with lree fractionated patterns hree being less fractionated for the most enriched patterns and with negative eu anomaly that decreases with decreasing total ree contents..
the average ree pattern of quartzrich and quartzintermediate graywackes is taken as representative of the average reedistribution pattern of our solid source..
shows two models for the melting of rock with graywacke composition ci being dry initial assemblage granulite and hydrous assemblage amphibolite facies..
the best fit is obtained for partial melting in both cases granulite and amphibolite facies and showing the calculated and experimental ree data respectively..
similar calculations were done for rb sr and ba and the two sets of values perfectly agree..
however there is discrepancy between calculated sr and eu values for the amphibolitefacies model and their concentrations in analysed samples..
two explanations are either much more plagioclase is present in the initial source or the partition coefficients liq for sr and eu..
with higher kdvalues of and which are realistic for granitic melts according to arth calculated data would agree with experimental concentrations..
possible source high tlow granulitic paragneiss libourel was analysed for trace elements table the rb sr ba and ree analyses were compared with the modelled graywacke source..
the ree patterns of corsican granulite define field close to the ree pattern of graywacke except for their higher hree content..
when melting in granulite facies such paragneiss could give monzodioritic liquid and melting in amphibolite facies would lead to monzogranitic liquid..
as previously suggested cocherie and rossi the composition of and granites appears to be chemical geology..
traceelement calculations using nonmodal batch partial melting model to produce the initial granitic liquids of and compositions kd gneiss co granulitic model amphibolite facies model orthogarnet apatite do cl lo..
lo pyroxene clb rb sr ba la ce nd sm eu gd tb yb lu partition coefficients taken from arth those for plagioclase kfeldspar biotite and amphibole are listed in interpolated values are in brackets..
corresponds to the average value of corsican granulitic paragneiss..
co traceelement concentrations of the initial solid source material..
corsican granulitic gneisses are compared with the selected traceelement concentrations see text for explanation..
do bulk distribution coefficients for the dry initial assemblage..
bulk distribution coefficients corresponding to the following proportions of minerals contributing to the qz kfs..
calculated traceelement contents of the melt according to the dry model compared with the lo content of the primitive monzodiorite melt..
distribution coefficients calculated with the following mineral qz bio amph gt ap and qz bio amph..
traceelement contents of the melt according to the hydrous model compared with the lo clb contents of the primitive monzogranite melt..
more likely controlled by physicochemical fusion parameters than by composition of the protolith..
age of the granite source material the possible source involved in granitoidmagma genesis has graywacke composition..
this leads to sr ratio of which can be compared to that obtained from average rb and sr contents of corsican granulitic gneiss..
about ma ago the ut age..
if we consider twostage model the protolith being derived from depletedtype mantle with sri of the average age of the source material is calculated to be ma based on sr ratio of or..
this is minimum age because acidbasic magma interaction may have lowered the initial sr ratio of the granite..
inherited zircons from continental crust found in gabbro of the peloso cmu gave an age of ma which agrees with such calculations..
this strontium model age can be compared with the nd model age..
for each analysed sample the evolution line is drawn from ma in the diagram..
as listed in the average end is close to being the assumed granite age..
using the average nd ratio of the granulitic paragneiss taken as representative of the source protolith we can calculate the nd ratio which provides model for the time evolution of the its intercept with the depleted mantle growth curve gives model age of ma..
this age is close to the calculated ages of each individual sample as the nd ratios of the rocks in question are similar to those of assumed source rocks..
there is no significant difference between nd and sr model ages because the evolution band for depleted mantle in the end diagram is very wide..
the estimated age of the protolith can thus be considered as close to ma note that as discussed chemical geology..
mgk granitoids talcalkaline monzogranifes ha..
end vs diagram for basic rocks and granitoid rocks..
using as previously defined for the source material we obtain model age around ma near the tdm calculated for each individual sample insofar as the nd ratios are similar in analysed samples and the protolith..
the basic rock associated with the association takes root not far from the mantle evolution trend..
note that olwinerich rock of peridotite composition shows negative slope..
this evolution is rare and linked to the high ratio much higher than that of the chur ratio..
its chondritenormalized ree pattern is plotted in by arndt and goldstein not all nd model ages are necessarily because they represent mixture of material derived from the mantle at various times corresponding to major orogenic events..
comparison between corsican sardinian and pyrenean hercynian batholiths before the oligocenemiocene oceanization in the western mediterranean region continuous variscan crust existed between corsica sardinia and the es opening the possibility to investigate large section of the variscan orogenic belt..
geochemical data on pyrenean variscan plutons were summarized in and cocherie and autran..
it can be seen that the calcalkaline geochemical trends of pyrenean plutons are similar to those of the budduso massif in northeastern sardinia and those of the corsican unit discussed here..
the otherwise uniform geochemical behaviour of the hercynian plutons in corsica sardinia and the pyrrnres is not confirmed by sr nd and isotope data..
for sardinia the sr initial ratio of from the budduso massif cocherie is close to the unpublished values cited by from the sarrabus massif and those for the bono intrusive complex..
these sr initial ratios fall between those from corsica and the es..
the show similar geochemical trends in rock ofgranodioritic to monzogranitic average scatter from for corsican granite to for pyrenean granite with an intermediate value of for sardinia..
similar evolution from corsica to the es is seen when considering smnd isotope data..
end increases from average values of for the pyrenean rigut pluton ben for the trois seigneurs massif and for granodiorite from the bono complex in sardinia to in the corsican batholith..
type granite remains very similar throughout the variscan chain from corsicasardinia to the es from petrological mineralogical and majorand traceelement geochemistry point of view..
broadscale zoning revealed by isotopes was inherited from deep sources of the granite..
such regional isotope zonation indicates that batholiths were generated along boundaries of the eastern and western terranes rossi and cocherie granite of the corsican batholith chemical geology would belong to the first terrane and granites in sardinia and the pyrrnres to the second one..
conclusions our work on the corsican batholith and other plutons of the southern realm of the variscan chain has led to insight into variscan continental growth through the origin and emplacement of socalled plutonic associations..
successively emplaced and magmatic associations are the result of mixing of noncogenetic mafic and silicic magmas..
two different types of mantle were melted to give mafic ultrak magma resulted from fusion of phlogopite garnet metasomatized mantle and in second stage zonerefining process led to significant increase of incompatible traceelement contents..
finally the magma interacted with the base of the crust leading to lower yb and nd and higher ratios in the melt..
magma resulted from nonmodal partial melting of spinel or amphibolite lherzolitic mantle..
primitive silicic magmas of both and have similar relatively low ratio as well as low to and high end to values..
they derived from the same continental source that melted under different conditions of fusion leading to different initial liquids monzodioritic for and monzogranitic for..
this emphasizes the importance of fluid content and pt melting conditions when anatexis of continental crust is involved in the generation of granitic melts..
intermediate rocks granodiorite in both and resulted from mixing of preexisting rocks of mafic and silicic composition..
isotope and majorand traceelement geochemistry support evidence of mixing processes in but in the marie and silicic endmembers were completely blended..
microgranular enclaves of intermediate to acid rocks of each association in the shape of undisrupted bubbles of mafic magma chemically equilibrated in silicic environment remained as remnants of such processes..
such magma of intermediate composition bridges the gap between mafic and silicic endmembers..
in such case the that was obtained is quite different from the calcalkaline trend of american coastal batholiths which are related to subduction beneath continental margin and result from fractional crystallization of basalt source..
this example from variscan plutonism shows that unconsidered use of the term can be misleading..
isotopic constraints give an estimated age for the protolith of ga and indicate that the corsican protolith is younger than the sardinian and pyrenean batholiths providing evidence for crustalaccretion processes..
the major difference between the two assumed mantle sources that yielded mafic ul and magmas agrees with progressive uplift of the asthenosphere in lithosphere under extensional stress..
this lead to melting of deep phlogopite garnet mantle around ma then to melting of the shallower garnetfree spinel lherzolitic mantle ma and finally to the alkaline volcanicplutonic episode ma..
this constrained the emplacement of the last part of calcalkalic plutonism to postcollisional crustalthinning conditions..
acknowledgements we thank autran for helpful discussions and suggestions..
vidal is acknowledged for nd analyses..
we are also grateful to the des sciences de la of the siie laboratory saclay france and to the caess of rennes france where respectively trace elements and sr isotopes were analysed by and ph..
thank the centre de recherches sur la synthrse et la chimie des minrraux laboratories at orlrans where part of the study was carried out..
we thank very much the two anonymous reviewers who help us to improve the first version of the manuscript..
the work was financially supported by research grant..
chemical geology appendix petrographical and mineralogical data on ui and rocks analytical data not presented in and are available in and rossi and cocherie..
precise sample locations are given in rossi..
modal compositions for samples are indicated by an asterisk..
association intermediate to acid rocks have typical mineralogical abundant apatite and zircon as earliest augite clinopyroxene surrounded by actinolitic hornblende up to monzogranite composition caplagioclase omonzonite to osyenogranite barich foxyred mgtibiotite ilmenite is the most abundant sulphides and macroscopic titanite are ubiquitous..
ultrapotassic rocks melasyenite to melamonzonite display some common characteristics throughout the different are crdiopside to augite clinopyroxene caplagioclase barich kfeldspar foxyred mgtibiotite and rare relics of phlogopitic mica..
ilmenite commonly surrounded by sphene is the most abundant magnetite is scarce..
of particular interest is the occurrence of crspinel in micaceous aggregates which could represent relics of olivine..
apatite and zircon are the earliest minerals..
the systematic presence of actinolitic hornblende is characteristic of such rocks..
typically secondary biotites are different in habit such as those that occur in mineral cracks or aggregates..
the earliest minerals zircon thorite allanite apatite sphene and sulphides pyrrhotite chalcopyrite exsolutions of pentlandite and oxides ilmenite and futile with exsolutions of ilmenite..
plagioclase kfeldspar quartz biotite magnesian hornblendeamphibole with relict crdiopside apatite ilmenite and titanite..
association intermediate to acid in granodiorite plagioclase is an oamphibole and biotite nearly everywhere occur together as magnetite allanite apatite and titanite are accessories..
amphibole is rare in monzogranite..
the composition of biotitebearing leucomonzogranite is close to thermal minimum in the almandinespessartine garnet can occur as an accessory phase..
ultramafic and mafic peridotite pc has heteradcumulate texture cumulate olivine intercumulus clinopyroxene partly replaced by pargasitic hornblende plagioclase crspinel ilmenite magnetite and sulphides..
troctolite pc pc lm mesocumulate texture plagioclase olivine foso orthopyroxene clinopyroxene..
gabbro assumed liquid composition pc clb texture of orthocumulate plagioclase olivine clinopyroxene orthopyroxene brown amphibole ilmenite magnetite green spinel and sulphides..
gabbronorite orthocumulate texture plagioclase olivine orthopyroxene clinopyroxene poikilitic brown hornblende apatite ilmenite biotite..
gabbronorite cumulate texture showing strong igneous lamination plagioclase orthopyroxene proportions equivalent to plagioclase clinopyroxene poikilitic brown hornblende and biotite apatite quartz..
orthopyroxenebearing granodiorite clb mediumto coarsegrained texture plagioclase kfeldspar quartz orthopyroxene clinopyroxene etched by green amphibole biotite and opaques..
norite pv clb clb heteradcumulate texture cumulate olivine cumulative plagioclase poikilitic orthopyroxene heteradcumulate pargasitic hornblende partly replacing relict clinopyroxene ilmenite magnetite sulphides green spinel..
gabbro clb clb coarsegrained texture plagioclase relict core large rim magnesian hornblende including relict orthopyroxene biotite itmenite magnetite gabbrodiorite and diorite clb clb clb fineto mediumgrained texture plagioclase some relict cores anso ferrohornblende amphibole biotite quartz ilmenite and magnetite..
diorite clb clb fineto mediumgrained texture plagioclase some relict cores green amphibole poikilitic biotite poikilitic kfeldspar quartz apatite titanite ilmenite magnetite..
appendix inverse geochemical approach the direct geochemical approach using trace elements requires choice magmatic model realistic fvalues weight fraction of the residual liquid appropriate bulkdistribution coefficients..
using published individual melt partition coefficients and verification that the analysed rocks fit the predicted model and parameters..
we consider that it is more suitable when possible to use an inverse approach examining the data distribution in appropriate diagrams in order to identify the main evolutionary process..
cocherie etc have shown that the main evolutionary process is easily identified by plotting traceelement couples of very different dvalue..
furthermore in the case of fractional crystallization the parameters of the main evolutionary process ci can be determined graphically cocherie without having to make any assumptions concerning the initial magma and the proportions of the minerals in equilibrium with the evolving melt..
